Yeah,
Welcome.
Thank you. It's good To be here again.
Um, so we've obviously got the, got some, uh,
material from you already, but, um, if you want to, um,
kick off for, uh, we've got half an hour if you wanna kick
off with, uh, sort of, um, three minutes or so, three
or four minutes of, uh, intro and then, uh,
we'll, we'll get into questions.
I'll try to keep it, uh, very short,
but, um, my name's Mark Bins.
I'm the chairman of National Infrastructure Funding
and Financing Limited, previously known as, uh,
crown Infrastructure Partners.
And I'm joined today with me.
I have Graham Mitchell, our chief executor,
and over here Catherine Mitchell, no relation.
Who is the, um, legal
and corporate affairs officer.
Um, first a few numbers.
Um, as at June 30th, 2025,
we have invested 4.7 billion in aggregate
and infrastructure across all our funds,
with almost 1 million invested in the last financial year.
Our statement of performance expectations targets were
all achieved except for one.
Targets included additional measures
for new responsibilities received on the 1st of December
when we were repurposed to national infrastructure funding
and financing net earnings, a fiscal 25
or 80.1 million versus a budget of 74.1 million.
Net loss. We won't take credit for that
because, you know, the major driver of our earnings is
movement and interest rates, which drives revaluation
of our securities that we hold.
Um, on 30 June we received approximately $170 million
being the first tranche of the chorus UFB securities.
And we're now conducting a market sounding on options
to potentially sell remaining securities that we hold.
Um, this has been a year of transition for the company
with a change of name at the half year.
In the addition of a number of new functions
as we became the shop front for investors looking
to invest in New Zealand and a source
of expertise in funding
and financing infrastructure projects,
we are actively engaged in all live PPP projects,
including the NZTA, led Northland, Rons
and the Department of Corrections y Carrier Prison expansion
and Christchurch Men's Prison
we're also supporting Health nz,
looking at private capital options including car parking
facilities, line Inc services and health precincts.
The market led proposals process was established
and promoted to the market 42 pre-submission inquiries
and five stage one proposals have been received across a
range of sectors with health
and transport being major focuses
five are currently under various stages of discussion
and assessment as the government's investor shop front
for public infrastructure.
We've built a strong working relationship
with Invest New Zealand
to attract foreign direct investment in New Zealand.
We've engaged with a hundred investors over the last year,
including global infrastructure
and pension funds, infrastructure providers, and iwi.
While we got these new functions up
and running, we also continue to promote
and work with parties interested in obtaining infrastructure
funding through the Infrastructure
Funding and Financing Act.
We have our third transaction, 1500 homes at Awa Lakes
Hamilton, in a position where it should close early next
year and we've advanced $290 million on our existing deal
with Tara Ranga and Wellington City Councils.
We have a number of projects in transport infrastructure
and housing under consideration for funding under this act,
we've continued our role in administering funds on behalf
of the government in the areas of rural broadband,
mobile black spots, cyclone recovery,
and our infrastructure acceleration.
I'll briefly comment on the last two of these.
The company funds the 1.8 billion Cyclone Recovery program
across Auckland, Hawkes Bay, Gisborne,
and other regions to help those regions recover from the
severe weather events of 2023.
Over $952 million has been invested to date, helping
to fund 50% of the cost
of approximately 1,450 Category three property buyouts
across Auckland on the East coast
with 1,171 properties paid to date.
25 flood protection projects protecting over 1200
properties, including 11 currently under construction.
33 regional transport projects with 38 bridges
and culverts repairs to, um,
uh, and replacing over 18, sorry,
and replacing over 1,185 damaged eroding sites.
We've done 35 local flood resilience co-investment fund
projects, which 28 have been completed,
and seven Fnu Maori
and Marai pathway projects.
On one July of this year, we took over management
of a 908 million infrastructure acceleration fund.
There are 28 agreements under the IAF,
which together are expected to enable around 38,500 homes
and 789 million of co-funding to 30 September.
We'd paid 4.8 million
and have received around 30 million claims to date.
Finally, we perform an advisory function we requested.
In this respect, we support New Zealand police's next
generation critical communications unit with the deployment
of the PSN project to deliver critical
communication services to our first responders.
The priority mobile service is fully operational
with over 400,000 instances of roaming per month
with over 25001st responders who have access to the service.
The new Land Mobile Radio network is completed in Wellington
with Auckland and Canterbury to follow over the year.
We also supported the Department
of Internal Affairs on options for water service delivery
entities and on city regional deals.
It has been a challenging year with the company needing
to grow its capability with staff numbers going from 37
to 49 and the board beginning a renewal process.
But management has risen to the challenge
and I'd like to publicly thank them
for embracing the changes
and delivering on what they said they would do.
And with that, Jim, I'll hand it back to you, mark.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate that. So we'll
Go straight to questions. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you both.
Good to see you, um, in front of the committee again.
Look, I I wanna ask some questions in the local government
space, particularly around the cyclone recovery, um,
adverse weather offense, sort of funding,
appreciate it's 1.8 billion that there's not really a lot
of discretion, uh, in terms of who gets that
or what the amounts are.
But what, what are you finding in terms of the ability for,
um, councils to be able to deliver the programs that
that funding provides the support for
Me to start? Um,
it, it varies across the councils.
So if we, we focus on the three main areas,
which is really Auckland, Hawkes Bay and Gisborne.
So in Auckland the transport programs are largely complete,
the repairs and they're just starting on the flood.
Um, mitigation here, which is largely stormwater.
That's taken some more longer than anticipated
because of the COVID that they've had to do
with communities, which is really substantial if you
go into Gisborne.
Uh, made some good progress there on transport, just about
to start a large rebuild around 10 road,
which is the inland diversion to State Highway two.
And I was just driving down that yesterday
and it's in need, I can tell you.
And then if you go and,
and the flood protection, they've built the Y power stop
bank, so about 18 Ks.
We're just working now on the other flood protections
around Racker and the Upper East Coast.
Um, which does take quite a bit of work
to work out the optimal options.
I was on Yra yesterday where we were working.
We'd have just actually just put in place a 90 meter
network, arch bridge with New Zealand's largest ever crane,
which is 1100 tons, just about half an hour north of ro.
It's a country bridge, which are the isolated
communities taken out there.
So some of these small councils are
really working quite hard.
We're working on a, the flood protection
for Yra, which is quite important.
So had 600 homes were roughly impacted during that flood.
That's gonna be a floodway through North Clyde
through some farmland.
Just had some, a lot of challenges
around acquiring land to get that done.
Hydrological issues, Hawkes Way.
Regional councils now just commenced it, sort
of flood protection project in the Tonga Plains.
So for an aki, we, unfortunately there was some loss of life
around there that started to commence
with the lifting the state highway.
And then the wider program,
Hastings District Council's done a really good job.
They've gone through their transport program quite well.
A lot of bridges have been rebuilt, um, quite a few open
and now actually complete
that program within the next couple of years.
So that are sorts of big areas that we sort of focused on.
The housing buyout programs largely complete other than
Auckland, which will be complete in the new year.
So, you know, there is some mixed capability
amongst councils, but generally we've been supporting
and quite strongly to move forward
and get the infrastructure in place.
It's, you know, rebuild order new flood protection places
quickly as we can. Thank
You. Thank you. Just remind
me how much
of the 1.8 billion is still available?
Oh, we're about halfway through to spend I think.
Um, we've still got quite a bit left, um,
but it's, it's all committed, right?
And the grant funding agreements. Yeah, thanks.
I can probably give you a more precise No,
That's fine. That's helpful.
Can I just do a quick stop off that,
which is just a number of, you said housing buyouts,
how many are we talking about?
And is that mostly Auckland?
Uh, all
of the Hawkes Bay ones have been complete about 167
Guzman's, about 15 the balances in Auckland.
And we're currently at about just about 1200 paid today.
And they are, they complete buyouts, so,
Ah, that's right. So the government
funds 50%. Oh of course
Council funds as well.
Yeah. So it's 50 50, is it? Yeah. Okay, cool. Right.
Um, Dan,
Thank you Graham and Mark for coming, uh, before us today.
Yeah, exactly. Just, um, keen
to get an update from you on the investment summit, um,
that we had earlier this year
and, you know, know that um, things take time
but you know, is there any kind of update around, um,
relationships and things that we can, uh, I guess
dovetailing that with Invest New Zealand?
Of course. Um, I'm just wondering,
you guys were heavily involved with that conference, um,
invest New Zealand's been set up, how's this going
and you know, are we starting to see any benefits
or we'll see any benefits from the investment summit? Well,
Yeah, Graham to comment on that
'cause he's had a, a lot of, um, interface
with investors both international, um,
and Austral agent on that. So Graham,
Yeah, I think the feedback that we've had, so straight
after the summit, literally about two weeks later we went
to Australia to meet up just about, um, a period
of days about 30 investors.
Um, so it was quite a busy week, um, tied my staff out.
Um, the, the,
the key message back from them was the summit was a really
good Reese setting on New Zealand sort of open
for business open.
And we're opening up that sort
of big infrastructure investment that we do actually need
to support us and what we do as a country.
Um, there's a number of quite engaged, um, result of that.
So I think it's a very good in, we've, you have to back of
that, we've formed upwards
of over a hundred investor relationships, um, off back of
that, across, across the various jurisdictions as well.
So there is a, a lot
of interest in VC in New Zealand now, which is good.
And this isn't a public infrastructure space
and of course in Invest New Zealand look
after foreign direct investment into private infrastructure,
which is not the public infrastructure space.
Mm-hmm. And, and you know, obviously a result of the, uh,
northern corridor PPP, there's three, uh,
international investors into that,
into the bidding consortiums along
with the three large contractors.
And there's the Christchurch means PPP,
which also have three investors in there
with three contracted consortiums as well.
And I think that there is strong interest for more so as the
pipeline develops where we can deploy that capital,
you know, there is definitely market interest for it.
I think it's fair to say there's not gonna be
any shortage of market capital.
Yeah, Right.
And just, um, in relation to Invest New Zealand, I know
it's only just been set up,
but just keen to get a sense on how that, um, interface
is going between your organization and invest New Zealand.
Um, the intent is the intent actually, um,
being delivered in terms of them getting, dealing
with investors and then working
with yourselves on the projects.
So any updates,
It's going well.
So every time that we're offshore we'll go
and meet with investors with Invest New Zealand, so hand
and glove in that regard.
Um, you know, they'll feed us some things
and we keep them fully up to date where we, we are,
we think it's a very, you know, synergistic relationship.
Um, and it's been working very well date, you know, they,
they were sort of existed in some sense inside the old NZTE
and they're obviously they're formed out separately
and they're just about to, you know,
they're making progress on their new
executives and things like that.
So, you know,
and they're very useful when we actually go offshore as well
'cause they know investors that we are dealing with.
So it's useful that we both know exactly
what we're doing in those markets.
So, so it's very clear
and it's been working really well today.
We've got a very good, great working relationship with them.
Great. Thank you Tracy.
Thank you. Um, with regard to the PPPs
that you just just mentioned mm-hmm.
Uh, and the need obviously to ensure
that there's long term value for money, um,
which is incredibly important.
What are the kind of risks
and which entity is involved in monitoring?
So, well,
Our role is to support the agencies
that actually take the lead on those.
So NZT is clearly taking the lead on the transport
and the corrections takes the lead on, um, the prisons.
And Treasury has the overall investment monitoring
framework, um, across those.
So, and that's really part of the, their process
that they do, the gateway reviews
and all those sorts of things as well.
So that's where that role set.
So we are sitting there assisting them on the financing on
some of the procurement elements and, and things like that.
So we're very much in support of them.
We're not, we're not a control agency across them or
Anything like that. We're not getting into
the detail.
We're making sure the risk settings are right
and the financing is done correctly.
So can you tell us a little bit more about
what those risk settings are in terms of risks of financing?
Well, you wanna do the financing button?
I can do the other, yeah. Okay.
You wanna do the financing first? Yeah,
Well on, on the financing.
So, you know, we, we participated with the agency
and when they went to market to found out
how we'd actually finance, um, they had
to make sure there's enough capacity in the market and
therefore also what the interest rate
risks relation to that was.
And, you know, developed a strategy which are now
following through on that.
And obviously, you know, this is now in procurement.
Um, so, you know, we can't talk too much
around the details o of that
because it's obviously under probity.
But y you know,
I just ask a specific question then about
of prison mm-hmm.
As an example. 'cause it's been done in two phases.
Going back to the 2016, uh, detailed business case,
which didn't quite make it,
but it's now proceeding on the second phase of it, um,
under the concept of a variation to the original contract.
How, how involved in that process have you been?
Um, we, we, you know what, again,
partners taking the lead on that.
Um, and we're supporting um, relation to some commercial
support on that and some financing support on that.
But it's very much their project
That have included giving Any advice on whether
a variation can be more than a hundred percent bigger than
what the original, the original?
No. That, no, because that's decisions
that the department would make with their minister.
It's not a matter that would be involved in,
We get involved when the decision has been made
to proceed with A PPP.
Yeah. And not just how it is structured
and how that risk allocation would might work.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Okay. Oh, Simon.
Oh, I'm sure, Oh, did you have stuff off that?
Yeah, I did us up on this and then go on the list for later.
But just, um, I guess like
is it always possible to get a sufficient transfer
of risk to make it worthwhile?
I mean, are you able to,
when it comes to public infrastructure?
'cause I think what we found with,
Well you may certainly say transmission GU was a very
effective risk transfer, wouldn't you?
Mm.
You would say that was effective? I
Would, yeah. Don't you explain
a bit more Mr
H, how, how has the risk been transferred?
Oh, basically you had a, a consortium that was prepared
to take all the risk in terms in terms of the construction
and also the consenting risk, which in my view, I mean,
was a very bold step of the, the consortium.
So in my view, my humble view, I mean, I think
the Crown got a very good road at a very cheap price.
And if you spoke to the contractors involved,
they would confirm that they've left a lot of cash,
uh, in the project.
So I mean, it was a very, in my view,
a very effective transfer of risk.
Um, one, I don't know whether those contractors would take
the same risks again, but in
that particular instance it was very effective.
And we've got no reason to believe that on the,
at least my knowledge is more Graham in comment on
the prisons.
But I mean, with respect to the Northern
and Ron, I've got no reason to believe
that there won't also be a, an effective transfer of risk
to the contractors and that project as well.
Mm-hmm. Um, but I mean just
'cause like the idea was that they would operate the road
for 25 years Yep.
And that all of the maintenance
and would, would be included.
And that's not what's happening now.
Like the government's having
to pick up NZ TAs picking up the maintenance
for Transmission Valley.
I know they've got repair of it, but I'm don't wanna
Go to that too far down one.
They've got payment for that
and I mean, it's all part of the evaluation of the risk
and reward of um, bring the matter to it.
But the transport agency would've
more details on what happened there.
Yeah. We weren't involved in that.
Yeah. Mr. Chair Simon, thank you.
Um, really interested to hear about all the investors
and, uh, organizations that are, are telling you
that like participating in New Zealand's infrastructure.
I'm interested as to how ready are
relevant government agencies
and local government to actually engage
with the private sector to identify projects
that might be suitable for a private finance component when
it's not always gonna be the whole lot,
but for at least a component.
Uh, do they have the capability
and are they really aware of the opportunity and ready for,
Um, I think the answer to that would be the capability
is varied between agencies.
I mean, some agencies such as, um, obviously NZTA and
and Corrections have, you know,
grown capability and understanding.
Um, I'm not gonna name names,
but I mean some other agencies just don't, haven't had
that sort of level of, um, experience
and sophisticated, um, project procurement.
I mean, I think they are all aware.
I mean, the government's made it very clear that wants, um,
any of the agencies that look at major capital projects
to talk to us about, you know, what um,
potential private finance
might be available makes sense in the context of
that particular project.
But they're all different.
And as you'd know, I mean, some projects are,
are probably better to be delivered in a traditional way.
Mm-hmm. Others, I mean, are, um, more, uh, um,
in a type that would,
could be successfully delivered with private finance.
So it's very much forces for cause.
Okay. Uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, with permission,
I'll just ask a supplementary question on it.
So are you aware of any of these agencies, departments
or local government that, that have, uh,
may not have the capability, but, but good
or should, are you aware of what they might be doing
to actually upskill or develop that capability?
Next section? What, what we're keen
to do is the agencies understand their projects.
So what we try to, to do is go on their support and,
and really provide that capability relation to,
to private capital opportunities within their pipelines.
Um, and that's what, that's what we've been doing.
And, you know, it's an evolving space, um, as you work
through and identify those projects.
And we're trying to get some
of those in at an early stage into
the detailed business case process.
'cause then you can work out what's the mix
of government funding versus private funding in relation
to taking those projects forward.
So, and it's identifying those sorts of opportunities.
And we, we tend to focus on the big infrastructure heavy,
um, agencies.
Um, because that's where, obviously where the money is
and the local government, it's very much around, you know,
what can we do more in the water space
and the urban development space.
So the Tava Lakes is an example of
where we are using private capital.
That's a transaction where we are funding behind,
beside the private sector
to deliver council bulk infrastructure to enable
1500 homes north
Of Excellent Hamilton.
So, you know, that would've been probably not occurred if we
hadn't, um, been involved in that.
That's subdivision wouldn't occurred.
It's gonna be like 6,000 people living
there in the next few years.
Fantastic sort of facility.
It's gonna be lake kayaking, cycling, all sorts of things.
It's, it's looks fantastic. That's great.
I, I visited only last week, so it was,
it's great to sort of see that.
Yeah. Cool.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
You. Mr. She look
on page, uh,
Simon 20 Simon.
Yeah. I'm just asking for somebody to go out there.
Hushing the corridor. Thank you.
It's actually quite hard to hear. I
Agree. Became
hard to hear Tony. That's all good. Thank you Simon.
Um, on page 24 of your annual report,
you talk about the new approach around market led proposals.
It's sort of the, the first stop, uh, for that opportunity.
What work, if any, are you doing around the proposition
for Clifford Bay as an alternative, uh, sort of
site for ferry operations as part of that particular focus?
Well, we can't talk in detail about proposals,
but they have submitted, as you've seen in the media,
a stage one proposal to us
and it's currently under assessment,
but we can't really talk about that
'cause we are covered in, you know,
non-disclosure agreements and various things like
That. Understand,
yeah. What, what sort of, um,
timeframe would you expect, um, that consideration given
that you've, according to your annual report, you know,
you've already had a number
that have been received 10 currently under assessment backed
by the end of the last financial year.
But what sort of timeframe do you anticipate
that those sorts of things would,
would take you work through
It? It depends heavily
'cause we have to engage
with the other arms of government who have the policy
and the agency responsibility for that.
So those timelines are largely driven by the sort
of host government agencies.
Okay. Um, yeah, we can turn things
around within the secretariat quite quickly
and up to the governance body,
which is a pan governance body,
but it is really heavily time dependent on the interactions
with the government agencies and the
priorities that they have at the time.
That's what drives the timeframes.
And, and are you comfortable with the, uh, sort
of turnaround time of other government agencies to ensure
that these markedly proposals are able to be sort
of considered within a, a discrete but suitable timeframe?
I, I, I think generally we've been probably more
pleasantly surprised than not in relation
to the interaction we've government agencies.
The key thing with the interaction
with government agencies is once you find the right person
to talk to, 'cause you know, they are very large agencies,
and I think once you find those people in,
in the right agencies, we do get really good
feedback and, and good support.
So that has been, you know, to date,
that's actually been quite encouraging.
Just one final quick question of when those proposals
and appreciate the non-disclosure component,
but at what stage in the process do you publicly make
that information available?
In terms of the outcome
of a proposal going through this process?
We, we make the, uh, numerical outlines public,
but at this stage we we're not making the actual proposal
public at this stage under the guidelines
that we operate under, which is set by the government.
Is there an intention though, to release
that other information outside of the guidelines?
It's probably a policy question to ask Treasury
who have the policy on that?
Not us. We,
we operate within the guidelines that we're given.
Okay. A question from me. Um,
The infrastructure acceleration fund.
Um, so I've always looked at that thought.
How, how are the decisions made, um,
as to where the money goes?
Can you just sort of walk us through
what your role actually is
and that, whether you have any decision making role in terms
of where money is actually allocated
or simply it's the financing side of that,
and if so, who's making the decisions
where it goes and what, what's
Providing that you, the decisions were made
by the previous government of where
that funding goes was that's all fully allocated.
That's right. Correct. It's fully allocated.
It was allocated, it was a labor government initiative.
So it's, it's fully allocated.
So our role is to manage
and administer that to ensure
that counterparties deliver on their contracts
and when those issues address those,
so the infrastructure get in
to enable the housing at that time.
And all these were certain dollar,
so X dollars is allocated for a y
Dollar probably allocated. Probably allocated. Right.
Okay. Any other questions? One Tracy last lucky last one.
One more thing. I just wanna go back to iCare.
Can I just clarify
that you weren't involved in providing any advice
to corrections about whether they needed a new procurement
process for the second stage of ker as opposed
to the variation that
That decision was made well before we got involved?
Yeah. Um, I think you remember it was announced Oh, I know,
quite a while ago when we started. Yeah. Our role
On the 1st of December.
That's why I did 24.
So yeah. So that decision had already made,
Decision made. Yeah.
Given that we've got about two minutes left,
I'll ask one more, which is the, um, for investments, um,
one of which I'm very familiar with in terms
of council's investments, uh, does it,
does the IFF process actually access cheaper funding
or does it cost slightly more,
but it really just helps
by getting something off the council's books in terms
of its debt ratios.
The Latter's the
Latter. So it accesses
private capital gets it off the books of do,
but it also, the repayment of our debt over 30 years
where council's only borrowed for much shorter term.
So, and by the time
It's, it's a favor payback.
Yeah. By the time it's finished, it's fully paid back.
Okay. No, that's cool. Thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks. Both
five.
What's that? I thought well, I thought it was clear enough,
so, but you know, it is what it is.
Get straight into it. Okay. Look, welcome.
Good to have you here. Um, the first 10 minutes,
so I don't think we'll do an intro to the 10,
that 10 minute, but unless you really need to
for about a minute is on, um, uh, railways Corporation
and then we'll get into Kiwi roll proper
and then we'll then we'll go on to, um, ferry holds. Okay.
Thank you. It's not, not much to say.
It really is an introduction. You are right Mr.
Chair on New Zealand Railways Corporation.
I'm, I'm the chair of that board as well,
so I might save my introductory remarks to Kiwi roll that,
That make okay with you. So
we'll, we'll deal with that first. Right.
Um, I know that Carlos had a particular question on Yes.
On this, and I've got one and Simon's got one. So I have
A, a question on Q on New Zealand Railways
Corporation. So that's
exactly right.
That's what we're gonna do with first.
So right Carlos? Yes.
Um, who is responsible
for maintaining land owned by Kiwi Rail?
This has been re reserved for future well development.
Big question. Who is responsible
for maintaining kiwi rail?
Um, RC land that's reserv for future rail development.
So, uh, that, uh, kiwi rail ourselves
as the operating entity.
Uh, we are accountable for the land portfolio in either, um,
ne negotiating, uh, leases through to tenants,
in which case the tenant is accountable
for buildings on, on, on the land.
Uh, if it's spare land, uh, unoccupied, then
that's our responsibility.
Yes. So for example, why I'm asking that question is one
of the spare land in my electric muscular on Kiwi whale
now become a very popular sport for illegal dumpling.
And I've been asking Kiwi whale to, to address the issues,
but I never get any, any response or, or any approach
or method they deal with it.
So do you think you guys will go back and, and
Look at, we're happy to, if you,
if you gimme the details, we're happy to look at that.
Uh, if it's spare land, um, sometimes it's spare land,
but it's actually been teed to, uh, another party.
But we are happy to look at that. If you wanna send me the
information, I'll investigate that. Yeah.
For could provide us with that, uh, information.
That is also something we may need to take up
with Auckland Council as well.
So you guys are very happy to put some kind of, uh, uh,
fence or fence it up.
Let, let's not get down to a level of
Detail. We'll cons, we
will look at the issue for you. Thank
You, Simon. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, so I understand that, uh,
Kira Leases land from railway corporation about 18,400
hectares, 10,000 parcels valued
4.3 billion in the last financial year.
Um, is, are there any plan changes to the core lease?
And at this point in time?
Uh, I certainly, I can answer that for you.
Um, the core lease has been under negotiation between, um,
crown Law, treasury, NZRC, Kiwi Rail
and shareholding Ministers for some time
for many years will pre be me.
Uh, it is now getting to a point where it's close to
resolution with the extension of that call lease
and tender out to 2170.
So that is an extension of a hundred years
beyond their current expiry date, which will give, uh,
more opportunity to
and greater certainty for, uh,
optimizing their property portfolio
and, uh, generating potentially, um,
greater the turns than there currently is.
Because if you're looking at that, to lease that land
to someone other than Kiwi Rail, as
to Peter's earlier response to the question,
and if it's tenanted, they're looking
for certainty and surety of tenure.
Okay. So I mean, given it's worth 4.3 billion, is
that valuation based on whatever
rate Ki Rail's currently paying?
And is that, is that, uh, is that acceptable in terms
of return to the Crown?
Uh, valuation is, is done externally
by independent valuers.
Mm. Uh, and that is reassessed.
The last valuation was pre my appointment,
um, with respect to the return to the Crown.
Um, happy to take that question on notice
and check that valuation for that point for you. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that would be great. Um, good to get something back.
Thank you. I'm also interested
in, given the opportunity, Mr.
Chair for transport oriented development in Auckland
and Auckland on the rail corridor, Western lines,
southern lines, a lot of great
separation, uh, that's planned.
Um, so we can maximize the benefits of City Rail.
Um, looking around the world, it's clear there's, uh,
benefits for over and adjacent to rail on the rail corridor,
commercial developments, uh,
all kinds of opportunities there.
Is that something that is being factored into consideration
about potential, uh, uplift in the,
uh, returns to the crash?
Should that kind of, uh, development proceed?
Is there gonna be provision for
that in the, in the new lease?
See, we've got the massive, let's work on the last
We're, um, it's a good question and it's exactly right.
So if you look at most rail companies around the world,
there are, um, passenger and a property player
or a freight and a property play.
Uh, we are a freight and a property player.
So, um, uh, optimizing, uh, the land, uh, adjacent
to the network is absolutely a core strategy.
Right now we are in the middle of developing a master plan,
uh, for our property, uh, strategy.
And, uh, we'll be bringing that back to our board, uh, next
Year. One of
the, um, the steps that needed needs to be completed
before we can complete
that master plan is in fact the extension
of the core lease. Mm-hmm. Mm.
Okay. Great. Thanks. Very helpful. Thank you. Sure.
Couple of questions from me.
Um, uh, first one is, so the, the land is brown land, which
is leased by New Zealand Railways
Corporation, who then lease it.
So, so who actually owns, just begin,
who actually owns the land?
Because this whole thing about leasing,
I can understand the lease between, uh,
railways Corp and Kiwi Rail,
Which she owns the land.
As I understand it, Mr. Chair,
the land is actually crown owned land that, uh,
New Zealand Railways Corporation, there's the
best term I would say is custodian of that land, um,
that is designated for railway purposes,
which is then leased to Kiwi rail. Okay.
So it's crowned you got that right.
So, so, so the lease we're talking about
to 2170 is from the crown to, it's
From the crown to the, to NZRC.
Yep. And, um, and then kiwi rail leases
underneath that. Okay.
And it's currently a lot, presumably a lot shorter term.
The current expiry is the year 2070
'cause it's a hundred year extension to 21.
Okay. That's, that's, that's quite extensive.
Um, so, uh, in terms of the, um, the,
the idea of development property master plan, does part of
that also go to the potential selling some of that land?
If you'd say, Hey, well actually taking Simon's point,
you know, trans transit oriented development,
if there is some, if there is something that works there,
Kiwi looks at it, said we are never gonna need that.
Um, so can we realize that land
or is that a complicated process because it's crown land
and then you get all the issues that, uh, there are
with crown disposal of Crown Land?
I can't say that we've, um, so, you know, yes,
there is a first right of refusal, uh,
but there have been parcels of land
that we have sold in the past because there's no real use.
Um, uh, and, uh, it, it, it made perfect sense.
Um, we are currently going through the master plan program.
There'll be a number of pillars to that.
One will be, uh, first thing you have to work out is, uh,
what land is available for, uh, development,
what land is not, and then just going
through all the different strategies for each
of those land, land parcels.
But in the past we have sold, uh, parcels of land.
So that will be a, a work stream
that will come out the work the master plan.
And just to clarify
that point a little further to your question, Mr.
Chair, uh, one of the other points regarding
to the extension of the core lease is all the current terms
and conditions regarding consultation with iwi,
et cetera, remain unchanged.
Yeah. Okay. No, that's cool.
Um, and look, the last question I've got then, um, during,
during the year, the corporation qui acquired 13 parcel
of land disposed of one, the 13 is a lot of that relate
to Marsden Rail Lincoln, if, do you now own all of that?
Yes. The land for the proposed, uh, route?
Yes, we do. Yeah.
So, so some of that's been, some of
that is some of that 13 will.
Yep. Cool. I think the nodding behind that. Cool.
Um, any other well done? Any other questions? No. No. Right.
Okay. That's the first one done right now. Thank you Mr.
Chair. We will go, we'll move to Kiwi Rail proper, uh,
and um, invite you to make some introductory comments.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and good afternoon.
Um, members, um, as you heard yesterday, when Ms.
Here with the minister, I've been Kiwi Rail's chair
for just on five months now.
Was appointed on the 1st of July, 2025.
So this is my first appearance
before you in this context of Kiwi Rail.
I'm also the chair of New Zealand Railways
Corporation, which we've just dealt with.
Uh, but also I understand, uh, the Ferry holdings, uh, due
to appear after us and they will be able
to answer questions about the new ferry project.
We can speak to the Inter Islander operations if you
have questions about that today.
And we have, um, members of Peter's executive team there,
uh, who will be able to answer some of those questions.
We'll introduce those people to you as they respond
to your questions and their, their area,
um, that they look after.
You also met Peter yesterday,
and I'm sure he's no stranger to many of you.
No, I'm conscious Mr.
Chair and committee members, this is your chance
to ask us questions.
So I'm gonna keep this very brief.
Um, I was not the, the chair in financial year 25.
So Peter will give an outline of Kiwi Rail's performance for
that financial year, and he
and his team can respond to questions on that.
Since the deputy chair
and I started five months ago,
the shareholder has appointed three other new directors.
Two of those directors have only attended one board meeting.
So we asked all forming as a board our range of skills
and experience, uh,
and backgrounds give the board strong public sector
and, uh, financial acumen.
We also have strong experience in freight, logistics,
infrastructure and network management.
As a board, we are committed to meeting the expectations
that are placed on a state owned enterprise,
including delivery on performance value for money integrity,
and meeting the highest public sector standards.
The Kiwi Rail Board is resetting governance
to drive the government's expectations
of Kiwi relative reduce its costs, lift, earnings, volumes,
reliability, and safety.
Central to that is winning customer loyalty.
And we've begun doing that.
Customers are increasingly positive with about two thirds
of those reporting satisfaction with your overall experience
and a similar proportion finding Kiwi
rail easy to deal with.
That's quite an important point
because it is a significant improvement on a very poor
customer experience baseline in 2023.
In short, Kiwi rail has rebuilt the foundation of trust
and service delivery,
but that's never something you take for granted.
Customers are now seeking a step change from transactional
reliability to that of strategic partnerships.
The opportunity for differentiation will not only strengthen
relationships, but also create a meaningful competitive
advantage in the market.
Align with this progress and opportunity.
Our targets are ambitious
for the financial year 26 and beyond.
At this early stage, we're on course to achieve our KPIs
for financial year 26,
but please no more significant weather events and the board
and I are committed to delivering sustainable change
that kiwi rail needs and the country expects.
So I'd like to pass to Pete now, Mr.
Chair, to make moment remarks.
Thank you. Thank you Sue. And, uh, good afternoon, Mr.
Chair and committee members. And firstly, I'd like to open
by say, um, how privileged it is to be leading one
of New Zealand's iconic
institutions, uh, for the second time.
Um, during this exciting period, uh,
I acknowledge the high expectations of the public
and the, the role the key rail plays has been in central
part of the New Zealand transport system.
Uh, and for us to build that trust
and confidence, particularly with the investment.
Um, going into the business
rail plays an important part in New Zealand,
and I know you'll, uh, be aware of that.
It's total value to the economy is approximately
3.3 billion.
Um, that was an independent work, uh, done last year,
but also all that $3.31 billion is a direct GDP impact.
And every year in unseen benefits such as congestion savings
and pure road deaths, um, key rails and period transition.
Uh, and to secure our future, we know that we have
to deliver on a number of priorities.
Uh, they are growing value
by winning customer loyalty, as Sue said.
And our ambition is to become customers first choice.
Secondly, improving line lead safety
and behavior and we're on that journey.
Thirdly, standing on our own two feet financially for our
above rail or what we now call our services business.
Delivering value for money on our infrastructure investment,
uh, and that side of the business
that delivering operational excellence right
through our business in terms of better service reliability,
right rightsizing the asset base driving high asset
utilization and labor productivity are key
value drivers for our business.
And lastly, building a proud
and engaged brand for our people and our stakeholders.
We've made huge progress. Uh, over the last 12 months.
We've delivered on AAL target and we are committed to,
and we are now competitive with Road
and Coastal Public Trust in our brand is growing.
We are delivering the right level
of consistent service reliability for our customers,
and that's been recognized by our customers,
which gives us a stronger platform
to attract more freight and grow.
The last 12 months was a huge transition year.
We delivered on our operating surplus target.
We achieved an operating surplus in a services business
of 111 million, including a provision for the exit,
which was put into last financial year.
We grew our freight volumes
by 2.7% in a tough economic environment.
We saw substantial customer satisfaction across our rail,
freight and tourism markets.
We lifted margin and we bank significant savings
from a full year of our change program of 40 million
despite economic headwinds and other challenges.
Importantly, our customer net promoter score
or our measure of loyalty has grown strongly improved
by a solid 45 points between 23 and 2025
and 25 points for our inter island business.
Customers have acknowledged improvement
that have been seen in our stands of engagement,
particularly through periods of disruption,
but we know there is more work to do.
Our customer success is key to our growth strategy
and we remain highly focused on a service delivery
and cost competitiveness to support customers growth.
From a safety perspective, we reduced our total injuries
by 18%, along with a 73% reduction in
what we call our high potential near miss incidents.
These are incidents that could lead
to a fatality or a serious injury.
So 73% reduction in a year is, is significant.
It's real progress,
but we still are not taking our eyes off safety at all,
and we are still learning
and improving across the system
to make sure everyone goes home safe every day
through the year, through the year.
We had a large capital program.
Uh, we've been completing
this for the last four or five years.
We had $1.1 billion of investment
through network performance
and these projects included the hillside
and the Walham Depots in the south island,
which were both completed under budget
and work continued on the worry to Key Park,
third main line, which is now open in the electrification
of the line between Papa and Pcoa, which is also open.
We made good progress on the Wellington Metro upgrades, uh,
safety improvements, uh, and we started work on scope
and the complex work
between Wellington and Palmerston North.
Preparing for City rail Link is a major focus
and our major civil works called the Rail Network Rebuild
Program be completed by the end of January, 2026.
We have a very significant block of line this Christmas.
The network will be ready for CRL by the end of June.
We know that's causing disruption.
Uh, we're on schedule to deliver the modern metro system,
uh, post June.
We've got signal commissioning to do.
We've got some level crossing removals to do.
We'll continue the CRL train testing.
Um, but we know that this will double the number
of ORs within a 30 minute train trip of the central city.
Lastly, looking forward for 26 our key priorities.
We'll have a, have strong continuing relentless focus on
critical health and safety risks.
A strong focus on freight reliability.
It's the cornerstone of the business with safety
to deliver an on time in full above 90% the cook straight
reliability performance of 98%.
Our job is to keep the ferries going safely
and reliably until the new ferries arrive.
Plan our part to successfully deliver CRL into operation
from the second heart of 2026,
driving the a computer network to the punctuality
and reliability that's expected
and delivering on the operating surplus
of one 60 million plus services business,
which is up from 111 last year.
KI Rail are the operator of the inter R under theory,
and we're working closely with the government theory holders
to support the permit procurement process
and our role on landside of the structure
for two new rail enabled ferries.
Our focus will be ensuring the remaining two ships are safe
and reliable until the new ferries arrive.
Our role in the new project is small
and includes some design ice and minor infrastructure works.
We've been operating the Ries for 60 years.
We are the deemed operator
and our view is that we want to be the operator.
But as you know, and you will ask questions today,
that is a shareholder's decision.
It's not for us. We're very conscious
of the sizeable investment government's made
of the recent years and the rail network,
and we're determined to lead a cultural customer
and commercial focus to deliver outcomes
for a shareholder in New Zealand.
Thank you. I'd just like to introduce our executive team.
Some of the executive team are behind me, so they'll ask
to assist any specific questions you might have around
customers and dry metro level crossing,
CRL, et cetera, finance.
Uh, and if we can't answer those questions, we'll come back
to you with the required detail. Thank
You. Uh, we've
got, we haven't got quite enough seats here.
I was gonna, um, say if you want to invite a few
of your team to, to uh, to the seat, that'd be fine.
Yep. Um, I, I'm gonna kick off with the first question
and then I've got Simon.
Um, just the first question in terms of the, um, program,
which is from memory 11 or 12
or billion dollars over in a extended period of time,
I can't remember the start date and the finish date.
Um, what I am interested in is asking you how is
that tracking in terms of what you expect to be delivered
by the end of it, uh, to what you are actually delivering.
So you don't get to the end of having spent the money
and say, well, we'd intended to deliver this program, uh,
we've only deliver this and we need some more money.
Sure. I'll just, how's it go? How's it going?
Sure. I'll ask Eva to come and join me.
Steve's our chief infrastructure officer driving a large
part of the a, um, it's been just, if I could,
uh, frame this up.
The ARN has been a very successful program
for a number, number of years now.
Uh, it has been delivering on time despite the specific
weather issues we've had,
and CEVA can give us the details on that.
Um, as we take your questions.
So we, we are in the second stage
of the second three years of the Iron Nib delivery.
Um, on the first, uh, block of Iron Nib,
we delivered about $1.27 billion worth of work.
And in this stage, we, uh, had a reduction of $200 million,
but it's still come down
to $1.36 billion of work we are doing.
Um, on the first we delivered it at about,
we delivered about 98%
of the program we said we were gonna deliver.
And we are pretty confident this time
around we'll be delivering around 98 or 99% of the program.
So in other words, if you've got, you've got
that money 1.7 in the first instance,
now 1.3 in the second is you will deliver for that 98%
of what you expected to deliver.
Yes. Yes. So basically by the time we get to the end
of the ah program, you are hoping basically we,
we should be in a situation
where everything's expected to be delivered. Yes.
Is delivered yes.
Because we, we'll have a three year plan for it.
Thank you. Good. Right.
And when does that, the whole, the whole thing finish,
It finishes at 24 7. 2027.
That's, that's stage one and two.
That's a second stage of our
Yeah. Any other stages beyond
that. And we are
Four, Four years up.
Another four. Okay. So there's the UB 3, 3, 3
0.0. That's
what I needed to know. We're putting
The plan Together for that.
So about 2031. Yeah. Got it. Okay. Thank you. Right.
I think my second question was, um, Simon
and Dan, you have one too.
Okay. I'll go. Thank you Simon. Tangy. Dan? Yeah.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, we've got a couple of questions.
Um, first one is really about the way the Q Rail interfaces
with its, uh, stakeholders.
Um, Peter, you and I have both worked for Downer Yep.
Many years ago. So we, we know
what it's like working on the road, how hard it is, uh,
to get going, particularly when you need corridor access
or a permit to enter.
So I'm wondering, uh,
what feedback have you had from stakeholders
about Kiwi Rails permit to enter a corridor access process?
How long it's taking
and whether it is in fact responsive enough to, uh,
stakeholders like, uh, roading contractors
and local councils whose networks are to face
with Kiwi rails interface with RAs network?
Um, I can probably ask Steve to give some color on that.
I, there are certain, the road is very different from rail.
There are certain safety requirements under the Rail Safety
Act that we have to comply with
that you don't have to with the roach.
Um, so from a safety perspective, you, you, you, you've got
to apply for certain, certain, uh, conditions
and, uh, we will give application for those.
Um, certainly the road that the the, the network, um,
has all sorts of situations that might be accessed
through contractors through road and authority.
So it really depends upon the current particular location.
Um, if it's an Auckland busy, uh, metro area,
it's very different say in Southland
where there aren't any trains traveling,
but maybe cv you might wanna give a bit of color on that.
I think Peter's covered most of it.
But for the metros we try
and, um, combine the works when we do block of line work.
So like the Christmas shut down,
we see if we can put any extra jobs in there,
but other parts of the metro we look at
where our train time tables are
and then we work our way and give them access.
Alright, well let me be absolutely specific.
I've had a number of complaints brought to me
by local councils and roading contractors
who complain it's taking 10 to 12 weeks
to get corridor access,
let alone you can get a phone call back
or acknowledgement of this service request.
And it's incredibly frustrating
to them when they have their own programs to deliver.
Mm. So my question was what have you heard?
What have you heard on the state?
So, uh, thanks for the feedback, especially there,
there was, there's one rail network in New Zealand,
there aren't any alternative routes.
So we also have to track the pathways through
freight trains, through tourism trains, uh,
through regional trains.
So you have to plan, there's a six week train plan
that we have to put the service out.
So we have rosters, uh, we have to schedule
and plan the work going forward.
So if someone wants to access the network next week,
it can't be done unless it's scheduled.
So I, I understand, uh, your, your question.
Um, I don't have, uh, any customers that have come
to me and complained about 12 weeks.
I've recently been involved
with Christchurch city Council on the level crossings, uh,
and we are working together on, on on that access.
Um, I think it would have to be happy to take the details
and have to ha happy to have a look at specific examples as
to what else was going on at the time.
And it might just be not one contractor,
and if it was a level crossing in a very busy area, say like
to Auckland, then yes, I can understand how
that planning might take a bit longer.
But I'm happy to take that on notice and come back
You if you could provide that, that information to us,
And We'll certainly look at that and come back.
Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thanks for for coming back.
Um, yesterday one of the questions was
around the final costs associated with the cancellation of,
of ferries and it was accepted that that was the,
the full cost six 71 million.
Uh, are, are you confident that that is the full extent
of costs associated
with the cancellation of the fair project?
Yeah. Perhaps we asked Jason to
Step forward as Well. Sure.
Jason, you can answer that if you want. Well,
I was gonna say both come up. We've got enough chairs
There.
Thanks. Uh, so Jason Dale, I'm the chief financial, so,
um, so yes.
Um, and in fact the 6 71 also includes some offset
that we had from asset sales as part of the process as well.
So full fully costed net of any recovery of asset sales.
Uh, as part of the process.
The $449 million figure, uh, consists is,
I understand of landside infrastructure, uh,
cost project management costs and wind down costs.
It's, there's nothing else in, in those categories.
Uh, there, there was some SHIP program costs
that weren't related to the HMD contract,
including those costs as well.
So setting up design brokerage, et cetera. Okay.
Um, in that 4, 4 9.
But yes, that is the bulk of those costs. Thank you.
How, how many people were involved in the process since
uh, the government canceled the contract
or sought to repudiate the contract back at the end of 2023?
I, I can't, the end of 2023.
There were, um, in the RX program, um, with all, uh,
workers involved, um, including, um,
the two contractors who were there for an ECI,
we had 83 people on our side
and they would've had, uh, at least another, um,
150 across two project teams
In addition to that. Yeah.
You'd have to ask those contractors that,
but, uh, certainly, certainly dealing with them there was,
we had 83, 84 on our side. Okay.
As a result of that remediation process
where additional personnel engaged to assist with
that process, legal audit?
No. So that, that 83 was on our side.
We handled a lot of the legal ourselves.
Uh, we did, we did bring some people to be part of that 83
to handle that.
And there are a lot of shared services within Kiva Rail
that helped to, to assist with the RX project.
Okay. When you say that we handled a lot
of the legal side ourselves, were the external
providers engaged to assist
with the repudiation uh, process?
Yes, there were, uh, the, the, the repudiation process,
we engaged, um, external experts, um, maritime, um,
support people, um,
and other, uh, agencies from a maritime perspective to help
with, uh, working through the, the,
the pillars of the claim.
Were they, uh, experts that were based, uh, outside
of New Zealand, and if so, where were they? Based?
Yes, they were based in the uk. In
The uk and the costs associated with their services
as included in that, uh, four, four 9 million.
Yes, it is. Mm-hmm. Okay. What was the total cost,
Uh, for their services?
Um, we haven't, uh, gone public with what
that, that is at this point.
Um, but it's incorporated in the, the total cost
and that we've, we've talked about.
Um, but it is part of the,
the total package in the 4, 4 9.
Why is it that that figure has not been
made publicly available?
Well, part of the arrangement with the providers is
contractual arrangements with 'em around their fees as well.
Um, but we've also had to, they were working with us
before we repudiated the contract as well.
So we won't have to break that down.
Sorry. You'd need to Wait.
If we're gonna look at that, we'd have to separate the work
that was done leading, uh,
into building into the contract versus repudiating the
Contract. So these
are individuals who had previously been engaged
with the organization prior to, prior to repudiation. There
Was an engineering firm,
which was verifying the claims in terms
of the engineering work done to date.
Uh, and also a legal firm that we've worked with, uh,
which is a specialist maritime legal firm. Mm-hmm. Okay.
Do you not think more, have you got just a couple? Thanks.
Do you not think, given the significant public interest in
what some would describe as a complete waste of money,
that it's in the public interest to disclose exactly
how much of taxpayer's money was spent on the legal aspects
of this repudiation?
We've looked at what the reporting, what the total cost of
exiting, uh, has been,
and we've disclosed that as part of that.
There's a number of components to it.
We've looked at what were required to disclose in terms
of materiality of the composition,
and that wasn't a big enough component to be separately
material to the, the overall sum
of the 4, 4 9 or the six seven.
So are you telling this committee then, that the rationale
for not disclosing that figure publicly is, you don't think
that it is material within the four, four,
$9 million figure?
Correct. Okay. Right there.
Uh, I just wanna turn now to the, to we, uh, line. Mm-hmm.
Um, can you get an update from you on how, how
that service is going, um,
how much it's costing the taxpayer,
and, um, I noted in your,
in your report there has been a reduction,
but what's the, any general performance of that lines?
Thank you. Um, Adele Wilson,
who's the chief Customer Growth Officer,
will answer that question, please.
Sure. Look, um, questions about the costs associated
with TE hu a need to be directed
to the Wirecutter Regional Council.
Okay. It's their service and we don't have access to that.
Um, in terms of how is the service going, um, we would say,
well, the, uh, customer satisfaction scores, uh,
remain extremely high.
We received another 98% satisfaction rating.
Um, I note that in inter-regional passenger across the
board, te as well as Capital Connection, um,
the passenger numbers have come back.
Um, it's year on year,
and we're seeing that trend again this year.
Um, and we think that's a number of due to a number
of things for TEIA in particular, it has a lot to do, uh,
with the CRL wheels free, uh, periods that we've had
with no trains running.
So that's really impacted those numbers
and they need normalizing for that.
Um, and other than that, uh, we think working from home
and just the general economic, um, situation in the country,
was people really watching their dollars
and maybe choosing to work from home more often than than
commute we do.
We anticipate that that's had something to do with it.
Sorry if I got this wrong,
but so you have a funding agreement with the council Yes.
Or a contractual arrangement? That's right.
You saying that there's no taxpayer money
being invested into this?
No. There, there is taxpayer money being invested into the
services that money is, uh, uh, uh, given by NZTA.
Yes. Not Kiwi Rail. Yes.
We contract for services
and we are paid by the council
for the services that we deliver.
And who controls the pricing
and the, you know, is that in the funding ar arrangement?
No, that's the council's decision. Okay.
They look after their fair box. Yeah.
Okay. Great. Yeah. Thank you
for clarifying for me. No problem.
Okay. Carlos Primary, Well,
No, Simon have one already. So I'm
gonna switch, I've gotta
move them around a bit. Sorry.
Hi, my, my topic is on, uh, CRM. Mm-hmm.
Because we know that is on the final testing station now.
So I just want to follow up, like what was the,
what was the process of the Hanoff process right now?
Can you give us a little bit update? I
Think, uh, David Gordon is person to answer that question
For you. Sure.
So what we're trying to do is a progressive handover
of City Rail Link, uh, project
Kira is in fact running the network
through the city Rail link at the precinct moment, uh,
trans, uh, Auckland One Rail is running trains.
We have possession of the track
and signaling in terms of the operation of trains.
The formal handover happens in the new, in the new year.
The critical path for City Rail Link is in fact
through the stations, not through the,
through the, uh, network.
Uh, we are, we are very satisfied
with where we stand with that.
The, the issues in the station relate to systems testing,
and particularly the integration of those tests
with the network, and more particularly
around the fire and evacuation.
So the handover processes, we have possession at the moment
of the network, but not ownership.
City Rail Link, sorry, link Alliances.
The contractor still has possession
and ownership of the stations,
and then it gradually bleeds over
to Auckland One Rail and Auckland Transport
Supplementary with the potential reform
of Auckland Transport.
Will that affect the handover process?
That is really only a question that can be answered
by Auckland Transport itself as to
what are things that has in place.
Alright. Thank you. So
Thank you. Um,
I'm interested in the outlook
can be rails, freight business.
Um, how confident are you that the four year trend
and declining freight volumes and the two year trend
and declining freight revenue can be reversed? Again,
Adele, your area?
Um, yes. I guess first to, um, correct the fact based,
the, um, freight revenues have actually increased, uh,
year on year from, from 24 to 25.
And our tonnage has also increased
by 2.7%, uh, year on year.
Um, and I guess the question is not, what do I guess,
but what is happening?
Uh, we're indeed seeing that trend continue.
Um, and there's a couple of things driving
that Customers have recognized a general improvement, uh,
in the reliability of the rail.
And that's, you know, a function of the investment
that's gone back into the network as well
as very hard work from our frontline staff, uh,
which we are very proud of.
Um, uh,
and so that's been, that's been, you know,
a, a key factor in it.
And I think there is a general recognition across the
freight sector that, uh, freight is starting to pick up, uh,
across the board, which is great to see.
We have seen a peak again this Christmas
after two years of very flat numbers.
Um, and so yes, we, we are currently running ahead
of our budget and pleased with where we're at.
Right. So you stated that freight volumes
have increased, but I understand heavy rails.
Uh, target, uh, was 3.6 billion
net netton kilometers Q rail achieved 3.4,
that's not achieving target.
And that, uh, it's decreased four years in a row
and through 4.2 billion netton kilometers,
which is Q Rail's own chosen trip.
Mm-hmm. The 3.4, that's a significant drop off.
So how is that achieving
shift from Broker Rail
or any of the other things that QRA wants to do?
Uh, ports out the benefits of mm-hmm.
Taxpayer's enormous investment mm-hmm.
In this operation. Yeah.
But there's a couple of measures that you have to look at
to judge whether the business is, um,
it succeeding in the whole.
So for, again, I need to go back
to the exact numbers you're looking at,
but our numbers are that the net 10 kilometers,
which is a measure obviously of weight
and the kilometers traveled, um,
that is flat year on year from 24
to 25. I think our number is
Flat 3.6 to 3.43.
Four to three four. We'll, we'll, we'll clarify that
and come back, but our own numbers are,
are that that is flat.
Again, the tonnage that we hauled, um,
albeit over shorter distances did increase 2.7
as the whole freight sector eroding went back one.
So we are absolutely, um, improving
and we are carrying more freight
and we're continuing to see that, uh, continue this year
In, in terms of the year.
You've also gotta take the mix, the distance That's right.
And the weight. So last year, economic situations,
the freight mix did change, distances changed,
but we can certainly point to, you know, uh,
the freight volumes up.
We can point you to the sectors that was up,
the customers up, particularly Fonterra font had the
strongest year last year with us.
Uh, we can take you to site
and extension of Coca-Cola where we've moved, you know, um,
significant number of pellets going from 56,000
to potentially 2 86 from road on to rail.
Uh, we can take it to some
of the freight hubs that we've set up.
So, but you know, some
of this freight might only be moving smaller distances,
hence your net ton kilometer number looks at a
different compared to total volume.
Jason's just added me the annual report,
so I can see in detail we've rounded up to 3.4.
So you're right, Simon, that is as, again,
it's a function of distance.
I think, um, if we break that down last year, um,
and look at that, um, the closure of the PHI tunnel
and the coal program, uh, will have a huge impact on that.
We actually managed, um, that throughout the year to, um,
to largely catch that up, but not in the hole.
So that had a, that had a large impact on
that ton per distance
because from nawa through to Christchurch, it's a long haul.
Um, but look, um, overall, um, you know,
we are, we are up significantly
and again this year, um,
looking at very positive numbers. So we are growing.
So with the reopening of the tunnel Yes. Coal rolling.
Yes. We would expect to see that recover next year.
That's right. You know, we, we did, uh,
in the end I think we landed 20, the final number was, um,
I think $23 million of new business
or, you know, brand new business
outside of existing customers.
And we're continuing to see new business,
um, this year as well. So seeing
Increased value from existing
Customers. Exactly. Yeah.
It's a combination
Of all of that. Mm-hmm. That's
right. So yes, I can confidently say to you
that the trend, uh, and the increase is continuing.
Alright. Are we looking out next year?
We'll, if I can just put, if I can just put
that into context also.
Yeah. That there are only two new locomotives have arrived
in country and in service.
So when everyone talks about you,
we've invested all this money,
we've invested the money in the network infrastructure
significantly, which has reduced speed restrictions.
And we can take you through significant speed restrictions
reductions to improved resilience of the networks.
But in terms of hauling capacity
and traction power, there are only two locomotives
of the 65 that are coming.
So you might have to on probably a couple years.
So we can show the trend, but it is coming.
But the new assets, we've got new wagons in place,
so we've got new, um, standardized wagons,
which is, which is definitely helping.
But the new locomotives, which will improve reliability,
improve pulling power in the next two years,
we are looking to two, three years.
We're looking to commission that hopefully.
And so are they, are they,
have they been procured on a fixed price contractor
or is there a risk of variations? Of course, the longer
Things take to arrive.
No, that, that they were procured
through Staler resigned in Switzerland
and manufactured in Valencia.
Uh, that's, that there's an agreed price on that.
Um, and the only issue we've got there is a slight delay
because of floods we had in Valencia terms
of the delivery time might be delayed out. Okay.
Thank you. Can you give us any more detail?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. And Just
A sub. No, no,
we've got other subs first.
Um, thank you. Finish up on this as well. Yeah. Thank you.
Just on, on freight mm-hmm.
Uh, specifically the regional freight
hub in the lower North Island.
Yes. How much land has been acquired for
that project to date?
Um, uh,
I don't know. I
don't know the exact detail.
I'm not sure if David or anyone knows. Um,
I don't have the exact, um, accurate.
Okay, that's fine. You can get that. We can get taken. Yes.
What would also be helpful, I think is an understanding of
how much land is yet to be acquired to ensure that
that project is successful or not.
So just for, sorry, just for clarity, you'd like
to know the exact amount of acreage that has been acquired
and what will be required?
Yeah. Well, my understanding is that the, the plan
that has been approved has a certain, uh, footprint mm-hmm.
In terms of area and property. Okay.
How much of that land has been currently, um, acquired, uh,
and how much has been spent on that.
Mm-hmm. And what is outstanding.
And again, um, we might not be able
to identify the cost in terms of what's outstanding,
but, um, so that'd be helpful.
The other is just in terms of the progress of that project,
are you comfortable with the rate
or pace at which that project is proceeded?
Look, we've been in, you know, deep plan
and working with, uh, Nui group,
which is the Palmers North City Council, TTA Iwi, um,
uh, you know, the, these intermodal hubs
or these logistics centers do take some time of planning.
We are going through that in detail with the stakeholders.
Um, which also includes the markets, you know, the,
the, uh, base load volume.
Um, and it also includes working with council on their own,
um, priorities as so as well.
But there, there was close engagement.
In fact, we, you know, we met with 'em as recently as,
uh, three, four weeks ago.
Alright. Um,
I just had a quick question on whether you could give us any
more detail on the, like, timing of the arrival
of new locomotives. Yes.
Well, uh, we've had, we've had two, uh, arrived
and in service they passed their 5,000 kilometer test.
So they've been in service for the
last, uh, four or five weeks.
Uh, we had two more Locos arrive
in the last, uh, three weeks.
Um, and, uh, so that's four here,
and then they'll start to next year.
I think there's about seven
or eight of those local motors arriving as well.
So they're in the production run and they're, uh, yes.
And we, we've got foreign country today.
Um, Mr. Chair, can I go on the list for primaries?
Uh, look, I, no,
I'm gonna carry on this one first and then I'll go to primary.
Yeah. Okay. Um, just the tough high tunnel,
how long was that out for
Roughly?
Uh, roughly Through three months.
January, three months, four months, slightly longer.
Yeah. Probably, probably four,
Four months. Four to five months
Or eight. Yeah, four to five
months. Yeah. So,
but by my calculation what Stockton produces
and how much, how, what the distance is, if it had been out
for a year, it would've about 450 million tons.
That's right. Which would've gone, yeah.
So, so that, that would have a significant bearing
on, so you a quarter of that. So Yeah,
A hundred percent. Um, just
In terms of the, the, the line,
I've just been on the West coast, so Yes.
I promised I'd ask this question.
Um, if there were no coal mm-hmm.
If, if the coal production stopped mm-hmm.
What would you do with that line?
How viable is that line Without what proportion of
what I think you've, you've given us an answer on, on that.
Um, and your response to written question about 80,
80 something percent of
what goes across the middle line is, is coal.
It's coal. That's right. If that goes, yep.
Um, what happens to line in your ability
to be able to manage that line?
You know, we, we are looking at, um, Lance,
it's probably all looking for Jason,
but, um, you know, as part of, uh, network economics,
we're always looking at, at all of our lines.
And if the coal went from that line,
there's obviously still very important, um,
freight customers on the West coast
and Westland, uh, who use rail, uh,
and, you know, rail is, if we think about resilience
to the West coast, is,
is an very important compliment to road.
And I think everybody would agree with that's, so it's a,
it's, there's the, there's a straight economic
and investment question,
but there's also a resilience question, um, to be answered.
And, you know, if the coal we're not there
that would need to be looked at.
And of course I cannot forget tourism, so it's a critical
Tourism. Yeah. No, understand. My question
really was to you
as a business is Yes.
Can you keep it, can you keep the line going? Yes.
Well we would, We would. And, and if so, for how long?
That's right. Well, there's two separate things obviously
that are to be assessed in that that one is the
below rail investment, um, as you know.
And then the above rail investment, what we would do in
above rail, uh, is immediately seek
to repurpose the rolling stock
and manage, um, manage staffing numbers to adjust.
And so I would be confident that we would, we would be able
to do that, uh, and we would do that.
Um, and you know, the services as,
as we look at them and
as we price stand on their own two feet, so we would resize.
It's also a question for NZTA,
'cause if that happen, you've gotta
look at it as a transport system.
So you'd have to say, can the road handle the tourism trucks
that are gonna go over there, et
Cetera? Correct. Yeah. And then the
resilience question as well.
Correct. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
So, so it, so it will be a question
that quite a number of people would need to engage.
Yes. Correct. And look, if I can, um, uh, also on that, uh,
uh, visit, there's looking at a few mining type things.
There was, um, uh,
the question tunnel safety was raised, so mm-hmm.
Had a, have the mine safety rescue people.
One of the things they mentioned was
that there was an interface with Kiwi Rail
and NZTA for that matter, with some pretty long tunnels.
Can you just talk us through the, are you, you know,
look at the health and safety point of view.
Something gets goes wrong inside a tunnel with a train,
particularly, it's got lots of people on it.
Are you, what's the process?
You've got, are you all set to manage that?
Whatever it may be. The New Zealand network,
he is about to go on a tunnel.
I, David, to take you through that, his tunnel safety,
Particularly issue Tunnel vision now. Tunnel vision
And other bad jokes.
Uh, yeah. Yeah. The key issue in the ER tunnel,
which is very steep. Right.
And now I'm not just talking about er,
now I'm talking about all tunnels in general.
I'll start with then go tunnel in
general, one up to the wire wrap.
Very important,
Tara. Those,
I guess we'll start with ra
'cause it is the most pro, uh, challenging
of all the tunnels.
Uh, the way we operate the passenger trains is
that we actually hook a loco on the end of the train.
So basically if there is an incident, something upfront,
you can, you can reverse about the other side.
So that is part of the, the,
the re the rescue approach through there.
Uh, we have, uh,
and for the drivers, et cetera, they are a gas mask,
et cetera, so they can maintain vigilance, et cetera,
and take the train out of a tunnel.
The key thing is, if you have an incident in a tunnel,
is not to try and get the people out.
It's try and get the train out.
Is the, is the goal, if you go through the, the rest
of the long, presumably the people are still on
the train. Be pardon? Correct
On. And it's
better to, it's better to keep them on the train
and move the train than try
to get them off the train and try and move the people.
Uh, wire wrapper is a, as you know,
has been recently rebuilt.
Uh, it's actually quite a, it's a tunnel that's, uh,
shaped like, like in a V so
that if there is an incident you can actually roll out
or roll back there, uh, through there.
The tunnel doesn't have passengers through it.
And for the particular reason,
there aren't appropriate rescue mission,
uh, things through there.
The other long tunnels are the ones heading out at
Wellington, uh, through tower.
That's, that's a double, double size.
So there's plenty of room for evacuation through that.
So yes, we work with the mines rescue
and we do incident, uh, training across that.
But as I say, with people, the key is
to keep them in the train and get the train out.
Okay. So basically what you're saying is you've
got a plan for all of the tunnels.
Yes. And you'll be capable of dealing that. Okay. Correct.
Cool. Thank you for that. Yeah. I have a
OT tunnel.
Um, I think we asked some questions
but weren't able
to get them just on whether you disclosed the breakdown of,
um, CapEx and opex per line.
That, that's very much a question for Siva. I'm sorry,
Siva, are you able to Yes.
Respond to that? Thank you.
We do break down, so we have two,
we've got a maintenance budget, which is the OPEX budget,
and we've got a CapEx budget, which looks
after all the renewal work. So we can break it down
By line by Line, yes. Yeah.
And I, I guess the question was, um, with the, um,
closure of the OT tunnel,
was there like substantial additional costs on that line
over the past year in the Yeah, TAR
Tunnel. Tunnel
closed.
Alright. So there was a capital cost
to redo the tunnel and build it.
Uh, but in terms of maintenance of the line,
the maintenance level of service has always been the same.
So the rest of the line gets maintained the
way we've always done it.
And I, I guess, um, given that on the West Coast line,
um, there's mainly one client who's
the majority of the freight.
Yeah. Um, is like, are the higher, I mean, is it possible
to say are, are costs higher on that line than other lines
in terms of ca ca in recent years capital or maintenance?
No, it totally the, uh, we spend more money on the,
the main lines, like the north island main
track at the golden triangle.
Um, like are, I mean, do you try to reflect, um,
costs in the pricing for, for clients
or is it cross subsidized across the
No, it it, no it doesn't.
No, it isn't. Thank you.
Okay, Tracy. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I think the lesson,
therefore you was go not, do not leave the train
and the title, you especially,
It's a rescue train coming and
you're standing on practice idea. Yes,
That is correct. Um, but
I wanna go back to the south island
and I have a couple questions.
Um, um, one picking up on the extreme weather
events that you mm-hmm.
Prefaced in your earlier comments,
but with the, in into island, uh, um,
running at an operational deficit
and facing reduced capacity, um, until the new ferries,
um, arrive.
What sort of assessment have you done, um,
about the resilience of South Island exporters
and supply chains who, um, you know, rely on
that crook straight crossing
and what sort of contingency plans are in place
if there was major breakdown of prolonged, um,
outages affecting those, um,
south island freight flows? We'll
Take your question on two parts if that's okay.
Adele, if you can talk to first and Duncan, if you can talk
to the resiliency on the island.
Sure. So, um, look,
just from a straight capacity perspective, um, if we,
we've done the work and we are continuing to work
with the very closely with the industry, um, on our,
what we call our business continuity plans in the event
that we drop to a three, uh, ship program.
And, you know, the,
we have established plans with the industry.
We are very clear on if that happens, um,
which freight we take, uh, first and how we manage that.
Um, so that's, that's established, um, now
and, you know, is those, those processes
and systems are used with the industry now.
Um, and when that happens, when we have an outage, uh,
you know, there's, that's freight spreads,
uh, across different modes.
So freight goes to the coast, uh, as well as, um, continues
to go across the strait as it can be taken.
And customers make those decisions, uh, based on, you know,
the urgency of the freight.
So I'll give you an example.
Um, if we have livestock, livestock goes, if we have frozen,
frozen GOs, if we have fresh
potatoes in the last weather event, we're a big, uh, focus
for all of us getting our potatoes to the north island.
They went first. Um, so, you know,
we take it at the seasons really dictate what we're carrying
and we have very clear hierarchy as to how we organize that.
Um, and there is, uh, ample room on the coast.
Um, and it is important for everybody to remember that,
you know, you're talking the difference between, you know,
three and five to seven days, uh,
the difference between rail and coast.
So, um, whilst
and convenient, uh, it is certainly freight does still move.
Thank you. So Duncan, you answer the second part
of the question on the resilience
From an operational perspective, we're obviously, um,
totally focused on safe, reliable service.
But if we do have a disruption, we have a number
of business continuity plans,
and we have a, um, a plan in place
where the subject matter experts immediately diagnose the
extent of the issue and they,
and run through the remedial actions from fix in place
immediately, all the way through to taking time,
bringing in overseas experts parts right up to the extreme
of releasing a new ship to, to replace that.
It's over a really extended period.
So we, uh, we have all that in play and,
and we have, uh, are ready to go on that,
but our key focus is preventative and the time
and effort we're putting into maintaining
and maintaining that reliable service.
Can I just ask then what, um, uh, what steps
of any are you doing to integrate that with, um, like
that rail freight with coastal shipping?
Mm-hmm.
Yes. We, uh, actively have actively worked, um,
with coastal shipping, um, uh, to develop a product, um,
that can be turned on in the event that we, uh,
we lose a ship.
Um, yeah, that's right.
And we, we have a freight reference group, um, that could,
that includes all different types of freight
and we work very closely with them on the development
and are in the process of doing that now.
And what about just as, as normal, um,
well just in relation to, uh, an extreme event,
but as part of, um,
an integrated more resilience c supply
chain for the south island?
Um, yeah, I mean, absolutely.
Uh, most of our customers have relationships
with coastal shipping, um, and coastal shippers.
Um, and there are, you know, a number of services
that play the coast from blue water ships, um,
which are the big, um, international ships
that pick up coastal, um, traffic on the way
around New Zealand as well
as dedicated coastal vessels in New Zealand that are, uh,
locally, locally owned and locally operated.
Um, so there's, there is, you know, a good choice
for people, um, on the coast.
Anything active that you're doing to integrate
how you work with?
Uh, we certainly have looked
and we have taken active steps, uh, to develop products,
as I've said, um, for business continuity as a result
of going down to the four ship fleet.
So yes, we have, we have actively, um,
engaged in those discussions with coastal suppliers.
I can just add to that, um, I'm also the deputy chair
of the infrastructure commission,
and that is something that we have
done quite a lot of work on.
And that context is an integrated supply chain. Mm-hmm.
Uh, but also integrated multimodal freight solution
to manage that supply chain. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, because it does feel as if there's a one
or two steps, not quite right. Correct.
Yeah. It needs to be logged at, at a system level.
Okay. Um, I've got a couple
of questions as I'll go, go for this.
Just going back to the whole issue of, um, market,
market share, uh,
and obviously there's some particular challenges you've had.
I've talked to a lot of people who, many
of whom are your customers who by
and large saying they're really liking the chain,
that the customer, um, services definitely improved.
So, which is what you've noted, um, challenge for many
of them know price and you've No, we,
we've had got a note here, in fact, I think
I've made a note there that there's, that some
of the trucking firms are essentially saying
to keep business, they're dropping their prices.
Mm-hmm. Uh, which presumably means your, well,
my question is, I suppose, how are you responding to that,
if at all, to try
and make sure that Kiwi rail is competitive to try
and keep market share
or maybe to, to grow that market share?
Yeah, look, you know, overall, um, our goal
and the goal of, um, you know, the change
that we're driving a Kiwi rail is to
reduce the price of rail.
So that's, that's our goal.
And we are doing that by, uh, focusing on efficiency
and productivity, but also building volume.
Volume is what makes rail cheaper for everybody.
Um, so that's kind of our overarching comment.
If we think about what's happening in the freight market at
the moment, there is absolutely no doubt that it is at one
of its most competitive points at, you know,
freight has been incredibly, at incredibly low levels.
We've been in a deep recession.
Um, and you know, with that comes, um,
incredibly tough competition.
Now we've seen pricing that, um, we,
we do not believe is sustainable.
And what's really important, uh, for Kiwi Rail,
is it rebuilds
and goes forward in its future, is
that we do not buy into that.
Again, we must set our pricing at a level
that is sustainable.
That means that we can continue
to fund rolling stock into the future.
So we have hard flaws.
And my CFO behind me is a very tight keeper of those.
Uh, and you know, what, what we're finding is that, uh,
when we work with our customers
and we think about our products on an end-to-end basis,
rail is competitive.
It's very competitive.
And when you add the sustainability advantage to that, um,
it is a compelling proposition.
And we are growing, um, at sustainable prices.
And I think that's a very good,
very good signal for our future.
But that said, we are going to continue our goal and our aim
and our purpose really as a leadership team is
to make rail cheaper for all of New Zealand.
I can just add to that,
I had a fairly significant customer say to me on Saturday.
I saw them bumped into them privately, um, said to me,
they've seen a lot of freight from Auckland
to Christchurch wanna see more on rail
because they, they want to see, they want
to see more on rail because they're feeling that the road
transport option that they are using
is basically the cost is just escalating.
And the attitude that, um,
they say they are receiving from set operator
is take it or leave it.
So there is certainly demand for increase rate on ramp.
That, that, that's, that's very helpful.
Can you just tease out a little bit more too about the
customer service sort of thing?
You've talked about that a little bit,
but in that context, what, what specific things you're doing
to, um, to make people feel happier about the customer?
Yeah, I think, And here I'm
specifically focusing on the freight side.
Yeah, sure. Um, no,
we are very much focused first on just communication.
So getting better at communication, trying to, um, get ahead
of issues and proactively communicate with customers,
really about letting them know where their freight is.
We've put a lot of effort into real,
really basic systems and processes.
We've re-platformed all of our contact centers
who now have a modern CRM system.
So all of our customer information is held in one place.
And when you call as a customer, the person you're speaking
to knows exactly what's happening on your account.
They know what the last person said to you,
and everybody can manage problems
all the way through to the end.
Um, we're starting to track things like
how fast we pick up the phone
and how fast problems are dealt with and satisfaction
and all of those things that are, you know, fairly normal
that we haven't had the technology to do.
And I commend our people for the way
that they have rushed towards the learning and the change,
and we've managed to get that all done in one year.
Um, so that's, you know, technology's making a difference.
Um, you know, really focusing on communication.
And I think we're also, we are in a deep,
we're just in a learning phase.
We know, we know we are not where we need to be.
We are not where any of us are happy with.
And we're openly working with our customers on that.
They've been fantastic.
They're walking towards us with, um, solutions and ideas.
Uh, we are collaborating with them on those
and having a go a few different things.
And those things are working.
And, um, you know, and then in the, in the core,
and as I say, I come back to our frontline, um,
who are doing a really great job of just the,
the hard day-to-day work
of getting freight delivered in full and on time.
And we have lifted that measure.
We hit our goal of 90, we had 91, 92
for two months of this year.
Uh, we're slid back to slightly below 87, um,
90 is our target for the year.
And then the next year we want to go to 95.
And that's what we say is, um, you are in the game at 95.
So, um, that's our improvement trajectory.
It's, you know, change isn't linear.
You go forward, you come back and you think, oh my goodness.
Uh, but, you know,
we've got our heads down, we're committed.
We've, we've got several belief points
and our people are working really, really hard to do it.
I think the o the other point, um, that Mr.
Chair is that that is the difference
between the transactional relationship
and moving to that strategic partnership
that I commented on in the opening remarks.
And if you are the owner of that freight,
your key thing is you want to know where that freight is.
Mm-hmm. And you wanna know when it's gonna be delivered.
Yep. That's cool.
So just, just to follow the, the, um,
both the delivery in full on time.
Yeah. What was that a couple of years ago?
'cause it was a lot lower than that, wasn't it?
Yes. Yeah.
So we've had a lot of issues with, I mean,
the team's done very well.
40%, uh, was probably about as low as it got.
So we were tracking in the forties
before the network investment started.
Um, and, uh, two years ago, uh, about eight,
eight months ago, actually, we were at 60.
Um, and once we'd fixed all of our issues
that were actually in recording
and reporting delivery in full
and on time, um, having fixed that,
the improvement has been incredibly fast.
Um, I've been involved in, you know, turnarounds
of businesses with delivery info
and on time problems before.
This is the fastest I've ever seen a business, um, do that.
So again, a real credit to the men
and women who work on our frontline,
because that is, that is all their work
and it's decisions they make every day
and the way they show up every day that does that.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, Julianne,
Um, I had a quick question about
tourism passenger services.
Mm-hmm. I know it's not a big focus of your business,
but I do get a lot of feedback from people
that they would really like to be able
to carry bikes on the passenger services
and that it's not easy.
And particularly given that New Zealand's got a whole
tourism strategy around national psycho trails,
and a bunch of the psycho trails are near places
where you already have passenger tourism products.
Mm-hmm. Yes. Um, can you, could you do something about that
and make it easier to carry bikes?
'cause my my understanding is you a train can only
take two max.
Yeah. Um, can't take e-bikes can't. Yeah.
And so it's like a, a whole family might wanna go on a,
on a train trip taking their bikes
and they can't do it if there's Yeah.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Well, I'll just, can you do
Something? No, I'll say thank
you very much and it's on our list.
We wanna go after more event tourism.
Um, and bikes biking events are actually a big part of it.
So it is on our list. We are actively looking at it.
Um, but it is a challenge in the way our
trains are currently configured.
But I will keep, we are gonna keep pushing at that.
Okay. So, yes. Thanks. Good tourism experience.
We're working on it. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Um, just on the tourism front, um,
you've given us a, uh, reply to, uh,
our, well the applied to the submission that was made
to us on, um,
and then we asked you to give some comments,
suggested we deal with it now, uh,
rather deal with it separately.
Um, so do, can I just, um,
just ask you a couple of questions about that?
Um, 'cause I understand that the, the service that,
that the trains, which actually we,
the train which was actually used on the Southern was
actually the Alpine Express train
because there was work being done on the line.
So mm-hmm. We had pleasure of using it relatively recently.
Um, so basically what you're saying is it's, if, if you want
to, you would do it only if it makes sense economically,
financially for Kiwi Rail, um, as that kind
of tourism service, if there's anything
beyond a tourism service that's up
to the regional councils, right? That's
Right. So maybe I'll
suppose, so look, we run a tourism service,
um, that tourism service is,
doesn't have a government subsidy.
And, uh, it's pitched in the products
and everything is towards the tourism market.
Um, we also run teya
and Capital Connections on behalf of councils,
and they pay us to do that.
Um, uh, the Southerner, um, uh,
well, there, there's a number of southerners now,
but the Southerners service that's just been announced,
that's a private commercial operation. Um, I noticed
That. Yeah, I
Was gonna ask you about that. Yes. And,
and they will, uh, I mean, our job is to, uh,
make sure we, we give them price to access the network.
Um, we've done some work for them and been paid to maintain
and upgrade their carriages.
Uh, but the commuter services is very different from the
tourism services.
So, uh, uh, the, the work
that regional councils might wanna do, it's up for them
to develop a business case will help them,
but they then have to put it into
their regional land transfer plans,
Et cetera. Correct. And then that also
Requires NZTA.
Correct. Yep. Do you have any, um,
so I understand the mainland proposition,
that's the price of access.
That makes sense. Do you have any, um, comparison,
the quality of the service that you provide on, uh,
and the customer satisfaction you provide on the services
that you run for regional councils?
IE mm-hmm. Toya and, um, sure. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
And capital connection vis-a-vis the services
that regional councils themselves run, well run direct,
whether it's I've, whether it's at
or whether it's Brenda Weller slash Met Link mm-hmm.
Is there, is there, do you, do you sort of measure
benchmark yourself as well? You know,
Yeah. I don't
know their CNPS. Do we know that at C
No, we don't.
I don't know how to say it,
but I know I do have it. They have one. Okay.
Yeah, I mean, it's probably best for at to, to answer
to their scores, but, um, we, we don't have a direct,
we don't have a direct comparison.
We, we do fully compare ourselves
between our tourism services,
and then we have obviously, uh, do very thorough surveys,
um, on that customer satisfaction,
which is incredibly high
even by, you know, our council staff
Is half of what you, half of your offer in terms
of the both the regional council run once, isn't it?
Sorry, I was referring specifically
to the regional council run once,
not the, not the tourism services.
No, you've already done that separately. That's right.
So, but the regional council run ones correct.
Is how your satisfaction of the customers on those Yes.
Compares to the customers on the other two, uh, run by at
and met
You? Look, um,
good question.
We don't have the customer, uh, loyalty or lot.
What we do know is we know the reliability
and the punctuality, uh, of those surfaces.
And Auckland has improved dramatically, uh, from a reliable
and punctuality perspective.
Uh, Wellington has lifted, WRA is obviously still, uh, work
to do because of the, you know, development we,
we've got at there, but we don't have the at, uh, NPS
or customer loyalty satisfaction scores.
Do you think that's something that's worth,
um, worth understanding?
It's a very, uh, sure.
It's a very different service offering.
Uh, we are, we are offering
and we control the full product for the tourism market. No,
I, I'm leaving the tourism market
In Metro Community Services in in metro.
Uh, when we meet with our metro partners, we're, um,
very strong in looking at the reliability, the punctuality
of the service and the patronage.
Um, we are together on the room looking at those dashboards,
uh, in terms of, um, particularly the punctuality is
what will drive, uh, satisfaction.
It's certainly a question in those regular meetings
with those operators that we can ask them.
I think you are, it would be, um, a good adjunct to those.
Yeah. At 98%, uh, we're in, we're in zero loss territory,
but, but yeah, absolutely.
How do we get those last 2%? How, yeah.
Well, I'm, I'm asking the question for a reason.
You probably work out what the reason Sure, right, sure.
Okay. What we're gonna do
is we're gonna take a little break.
I'm gonna suggest that we take a break.
We had a scheduled break for 20 minutes.
I'm gonna suggest we make 10, uh,
so that we can then finish earlier.
Um, and if that works for everybody, so already touched it.
So we'll be back at ten two full break. Yep.
Okay. Thank you everyone. Um, so you, you had some, um,
information from a couple of questions
that have been asked previously.
So, we'll, we'll start with that.
I did, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, firstly, uh, to the questions, Simon, that you asked
around NZRC, um, the last, uh,
for the 4.3 billion of land, uh, was last valued on, uh,
as at 30th of June, 2023.
So if I see if that was well
before my time, um, it will be revalued
for the 30 June, 2026.
So the FY 26 year will be revalued.
Um, of that 4.3 billion of land, uh, 1 billion approximately
of that land is leased externally.
Uh, 600 million worth of land is, uh, leased to freight,
uh, commercial office space.
Um, and the number of those buildings are, uh, a number
of buildings midlife, well, they've just leased.
Uh, some of those also have land with groundworks
and sidings, but they haven't been built on as yet.
And approximately 400 million of that land is bare land, um,
which is leased for grazing.
And the remainder of that land is
protected from rail corridors
Leased for grazing.
Fantastic. Who knew? I
Knew, well, I think most of us did know actually.
So you urbanites might not
So we'll. Um,
we will obviously, uh, update all of that
with the forthcoming revaluation, um,
the chef this financial year.
Um, the question on the central North island, uh,
land purchase that Tony, you asked relieve.
Mm-hmm. Um, there has been, um, 63 hectares
of land purchased, um, so far.
Um, there is a, if that proceeds,
there's a total requirement of 167 hectares in total.
So 104, if you do the, the mass 104 hectares
of land would need to be purchased.
Um, the second part, but, but
Just to be clear, by Kiwi Rail or by New Zealand rail,
Um, that would be, be new.
Be NZRC for it on half of Kiwi would have to that.
Um, um, the, uh, the, uh, second part of the question
that was asked is the, of the cost of
that 63 hectares of land.
Yes. Um, there has been 32 million, um, spent acquiring
that land, $8 million, um,
involved in the master planning of that land.
Um, so that total is fought
and obtaining consents that total is 40 million,
which was all PGF Presidential Growth Fund funded.
So those were the two responses
to questions we would take on. Very
Good. See, PGF did
a good job.
Thank you. Thanks. Okay, cool. Thank you, Simon.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, look,
I'm interested in the, in your opening remarks,
you said the board has had a significant refresh,
and it's interesting to see the quality of, uh, people
and their capability that are now on the board.
But given that New Zealand does have quite a small talent
pool, as I referenced earlier in session, Peter
and I, I used to work for Peter at Downer many years ago.
Um, is there, is there question again?
Are there any, um, are there any, uh, conflicts of interest
between board members that might sometimes arise when,
you know, are serving in different roles
or different organizations simply
because our talent pool, uh, isn't
as big as it is in other countries?
That is a very good question. Thank you.
And I believe you and I were at Auckland
Council at the same time as well.
Well, there you go. There you go. New Zealand is a small
place, uh, to answer your question.
Yes, there are. And I've mentioned in the course of this,
um, discussion this afternoon that I'm the deputy chair
of the Infrastructure Commission.
I also have one other board member on the Kiwi Rail Board
who's also on the board of the Infrastructure Commission.
And now I also have the, in the independent members
of the Risk and Assurance Committee
of the commission on the Kiwi Rail Board.
Uh, so to answer your question, yes, there are,
and we maintain an active register
of all directors interests, as we do with Peter
and the senior exec team as well.
We look at it for all of us.
Um, the scenarios there, for example, um, with respect
to myself personally, anything
that the Infrastructure Commission may be involved in,
in depth, I recuse myself from on both sides, from the,
and the commission, uh,
where the conflict, uh, may be there.
It is important also to recognize the actual conflict
and the perceived conflict.
The perceived conflict can be the most tricky one rather
than the actual, the actual is quite clear.
Sometimes if you've got a fiduciary interest in something,
for example, that's very clear,
but the perceived conflict is harder.
We do have one director on the board
who is heavily conflicted.
Um, and there have been some,
there has been media interest in that appointment.
Um, there is a very detailed
conflict management plan in place for that director
that results, uh, in, um, him needing
to recuse himself from a number of, uh, a number
of items on a board agenda.
And also, therefore,
he is restricted in receiving those papers that, uh,
we are due to report how we're managing
that conflict management plan
to the two shareholding ministers early in 2026.
Uh, it will become quite evident when we do the amount
of time that that director has to be recused.
Right. But just for clarity, um, as you will all know, um,
I do not appoint the directors as the chair.
The, um, there is a process of which you will know very well
through advice to shareholding ministers to the appointments
and honors committee to cabinet approval.
Okay. So, just to be clear, Mr.
Chair, just one sec supplementary question.
Um, so the, so the inference from
that is a board member who's not able
to participate in important board matters
'cause they have rightly, um, declared a conflict
of interest and set aside from that, um, does
that have an effect on the efficiency, uh,
or the capability that the board thinks it should have?
It does have an effect is the answer to that.
Um, and more importantly, that individual director will need
to consider, um, as any director should,
whether they're on a public, um, board, a private board,
or a publicly listed board,
whether they can discharge their duties
as they have required
to in accordance with the companies Act.
Interesting. Okay. Thank you for raising that.
Thank you. Thank you. It's a good question.
Um, Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and this question won't come as any surprise
because it's one that I often, uh, ask
as the MP for Palmerston North.
Uh, and yesterday I asked the minister
and the chief executive answered as well
around the Capital Connection Service.
Now, that is an iconic local service
that is extremely important.
And the proposal is
that over time the service will increase, which is
what the community has been doing for quite some time.
What confidence can the community have
and the fact that that will be delivered on time
and that the provisions of the service increases, uh,
will be maintained as well.
So, um, a as I um, mentioned yesterday in terms of, uh,
rum, which is, uh, circa 172 million that's been
provided for the Wellington Departments North,
there is significant work, uh, underweight to,
to scope the infrastructure requirements, um,
detailed design, and we've now got,
now got procurement underway for that.
Um, but that, that, that service looks at,
or the investment will look at passing loops, um, in
stabling and Masterton, uh, wire app station improvements,
some additional signaling work.
Um, so the actual network, um, through to
that end location is a certainly, uh, a big investment.
And also looking at, uh, uh, level crossings, um, in terms
of, um, regional council in terms of, you know, uh,
greater Wellington, what their intentions are there, or, or,
or how they look to, uh,
invest in certain terms of the rolling stock.
You've obviously, uh, been aware of the investment
that's been made, which is globally,
and I will say it's globally exciting, uh, battery electric,
um, with one of the first countries to do that.
So, um, I think that is a very good indication
that both the infrastructure
and the rolling stock, uh, is gonna be supportive of,
um, extended services.
Okay. Take that as full confidence. Full
Confidence. Um, just,
I wanna go back to price, um, price issue.
So you said that, um, ADE you said there was basically a
flaw that you wouldn't go below Uhhuh.
And I think my question now is what's the
trajectory been of Prime?
You know, have prices been rising
or, you know, what's,
what's been going on there in terms of Yeah.
And how does that interface
with whatever the pricing has been happening in the
competition IE the trucking industry, which Yeah.
You seem to indicated be going down.
So what's the trajectory been
Trajectory? So
if, if you go back to really when, um, QL began a,
a commercial reset, which was in around 2020, um,
and I, you know, I think I've explained this
before, uh, really moved pricing to, uh,
what we would say is a sustainable
or commercial level, um, over the period from 2020, um,
through 20 22, 20 23.
Um, and I think that, you know, we found,
what we found was definitely the ceiling.
Um, we, we always work with, uh, you know, that
what we think of as the next best alternative
sitting next to our pricing.
And I think we didn't quite have that model right in terms
of looking at the end to end.
Uh, we weren't always looking at the additional
costs that come with rail.
So there's a genuine infrastructure cost for customers.
There is, um, in some cases, not all cases, uh,
an additional lift, um, that you have
to take into account, uh, with rail.
So it's really important in probably if we look at sort
of 2022 as a high point,
what we've done since then is recalibrated that model
to make sure that we're looking end to end at pricing.
Um, and that's by
End do you mean
beginning of the journey to end of journey?
That's exactly right. Versus so any
Transfers or that Sort of thing That's right.
Versus the, you know, competing mode, whatever that may be.
Um, you know, in most cases road.
So, you know, we've tweaked that model and,
and that's caused us to,
to have a look at at some, some things.
But generally, um, you know, we have continued to, um, so,
so there's some of that, which is,
there's been a slight rebalancing,
but we are still, uh, moving through a process of, um,
resetting some long-term deals which have been, uh,
priced at a level that is not sustainable.
And we've done that very successfully. So, too low.
Too low, yeah. And, but we've been doing that
and I think the thing that we are most pleased
with is the way that we've come through some
of those significant resets, uh, with a strategic plan
for growth at the end of them.
And that's been a process of, um, you know, to Sue's point
as opposed to being transactional, actually sitting down
with customers, um, being prepared to be really open
and transparent about, about how we look at our costs
and how we look at our pricing
and working with, through, with customers on what's fair
for both parties and what works for both parties.
Um, and you know, how we can build volume together
and in some cases, you know, where it's appropriate,
taking some risk on volume build together, um,
and those kind of approaches are working.
And so overall,
if we put the trajectory down on the page, it would, it is,
you know, it is heading up,
but within that, there has been some rebalancing, um,
based on improving our next best alternative model.
So as you, and as you've been going through that, uh,
rebalancing, have you been losing some customers?
No. No.
In fact, um, you know, we've,
we've been deepening relationships, uh,
and as I said, um, really working on
strategic growth in the future, um,
as we've been doing those resets.
So, um, and that's about as much as
how we work together on pricing
and on growth, um, as it is about just the plain number.
Um, it's also, um, a part of that is also
how we work together on scheduling.
Yes, absolutely. As the customer actually understanding sort
of the, their input to us
and the timing of that, how we can actually make
that work more efficiently and some of the things
that they may be doing,
which actually are not helping either party, um,
but ultimately is disappointing their customer as well.
So again, it's that that piece,
as Del says about being transparent.
I've got two other areas of questions,
Julie, but Julianne, you go first. Oh,
You want me to go first? Um,
I wanted to go back to the Rail network
investment program
and just, um, how government has
made it harder, I guess, to have a longer term guarantee on
what, what funding might be available for investment.
Um, so my understanding is that it might not be possible
to keep all lines open
with current service levels based on current
government commitments.
So I will make, I'll take the macro side. Mm-hmm.
In terms of, and, and we went through the questions
before in terms of the macro, uh, investment, um,
and, uh, and what Steve has been doing, you know, the,
the last, um, two R packages we've certainly delivered, uh,
what we've needed to do in, in the time, the focus
for us now is around value for money.
So, um, the investment, um, if it did come back,
and it's still at the moment, um, more
and what it was, uh, three, four years ago,
the focus now is on a value
for money getting more and more efficiency.
So when we took look at our, our, our model, um, we,
we could, uh, talk about in some detail, we have a, uh,
a model right now that looks at all the corridors,
just looks at the actual, um, asset condition,
looks at the investment required going forward,
looks at the volume growth.
Is it a growth network? Is it a non-growth network?
Look at emissions avoided.
Uh, we look at all the data on, on the per corridor
and, uh, our investment plan,
our asset manage management plan going forward, um, will,
will influence the investment we make in each
area dependent upon growth.
If there are some areas, um, for example, where the,
there is no growth, um,
and we can't see the, um, the, the, the future bond growth,
they will obviously look at the
capital that goes into that network.
Um, if there are some areas where, uh,
it's gonna be too expensive to, um, uh,
fix an asset like lower South Island la.
Last year there was a bridge
that it was just gonna be too expensive to invest in.
Uh, and we, we basically looked to, uh, work with, uh,
uh, the, the customer to actually, uh, road bridge that, um,
as opposed to using rail.
So corridor by corridor, um, there are no networks, uh, uh,
now that, uh, we are saying, um, fully under the network,
we, we, we can't afford to invest,
but there are allocation priorities we obviously have
to make in a network like ours.
Mm.
To add to that, What Pete Peter was saying,
what we do is we take our, it's not an asset centric view.
We take on the network. So we've got the asset management
plan, we all overlay the network economics plan done
for my CFO's office and, uh, Adele's team.
And then we take the corridor growth plan
and we overlay all of that,
and then we look where we do the investments in terms
of value for money.
Now, that's been a big focus for us.
And an example of that is our, we standardized a lot
of our structures, bridge designs, uh,
we optimize the bridge design,
and it's about 30% less than what it used to be.
And over the last two years,
we've gone from a bridge being about $300,000,
a linear meter to about $150,000 a linear meter.
And we try to push it to go to $125,000 a linear meter.
And it's also given certainty to contractors who work
with us, what the, the designs are.
But I guess, like, you know, the government has a roads
of national significance program with a really ambitious,
um, level of investment.
They're touting for the state highways network, um,
Kiwi rail's, not in a position to do like long-term planning
for growth, uh,
because we don't have that same commitment from government.
You're kind of just operating now in the very short term,
trying to stretch the dollars to keep things going
as opposed to really growing the potential.
We have a, we have a, compared to
what it was 10 years ago, as you know, uh,
we have a a three year planning and funding cycle.
Um, and, uh, our objective is, is, uh, we'll be,
uh, hoping that that continues.
Uh, but we have a very, uh,
detailed asset management plan to look at every corridor.
Uh, and yes, we have, we are working with key customers,
particularly in longer term growth plans beyond three years.
Um, and, uh, that at this stage we're not finding
that it's impacting our customer's, um, ability
to come with us and grow with us.
And it certainly helps with the current investment plan,
which, as I said, that cycle carries on, that
that is positive for customer trust,
I think. Um, and
the other part to that, um, goes
to a question I answered earlier, I think from Tracy is
that ideally if
what Utopia looks like is we would actually have a good view
of an infrastructure plan, which is
what the infrastructure commission's working on, uh,
and that, and the integrated transport
network as to what's needed.
And I think that would give quite an, a significant amount
of information that could input to that longer term view.
Can I just ask a specific question?
Question about the third main, um, I, I mean, we haven't,
I haven't heard talk of a fourth main
for a while, is that, sorry,
About third Main, third and fourth main, um,
but with the, the significant competition between passenger
and freight in Auckland, is that going to be necessary?
Are you, have you done on any work on that? Well,
Well look, it's, uh, you know, if you look at most modern,
uh, metro networks that are growing, um,
there is investment in terms
of splitting out freight and passengers.
So yes, the way patronage growth
and Auckland is planning the fourth main,
from our perspective, definitely a longer term project
that will be important for the economic and passenger
and freight growth in and
Out of Aland. Sorry,
David. Uh, that's what Peter said,
so I'm not sure I've got, I'm here.
I think I made one other comment that you can
increase the use of the existing mains
by changing the signaling as well.
So our goal is to long term,
acquire sufficient land over a long period of time
to build the, the, the fourth main in the meantime
to use signaling and other technology
to bring the trains closer together
to maximize the value of what we've already spent.
Do we need any upgrades
to the signaling system in Auckland?
Is that, or do you own that, or is that one rail?
Uh, no, no, no. Definitely us. Us. Okay.
At the moment, the signaling system is perfectly acceptable
for the volumes we have.
If we want to dramatically increase the volumes
and let's hope that it grows, then we will need
to upgrade from what is called ETCS level one, ultimately
to ETCS level two,
and there is an interim step in
there as well that we can do.
And what sort of timeframe would be,
uh, that be happening?
Mid 2030s would be Okay. A better view of it. Yeah. Yes.
But in terms of building infrastructure in the, in the,
in a civic environment, you have to start
get securing the land now.
Great. It's a long haul, like Sure.
So I, I actually, that was one of my two areas
of questions, which is, so we heard yesterday,
and this is about future infrastructure, um,
require additions effectively.
So we heard yesterday that the,
the Marston line is basically waiting
for funding, essentially.
You've got all the land, you've got the con,
you've got the consents, et cetera,
and then there's fourth rail through Auckland.
Are there any other areas where you are looking at saying,
well, actually we think we might need something else,
and it might be, it also relates to some of the, we'll deal
with ports and, and, um, port accesses
and the maritime bits at another start another day.
Mm-hmm. But, um, are there any other areas, whether it's,
you know, um, uh, uh, in land ports
or whatever where you, where you think you're gonna need
significant capital projects?
There's a couple that I'll mention.
The first is south down to Avondale line, which again,
that is a late 2030s, 2040s build,
but the designation for that lapses in 2029.
And we need to have either done sufficient work
to give effect to the designation
or have changes to the planning to ensure
that we can keep that designation.
That is a, again, a long haul thing.
We actually own much like master point,
we own almost all the land that is required for that.
It's a corridor in an urban area,
which you don't want to give up long term.
Another one, which is relevant is the, uh, grade separation
of Westfield Junction that comes into play, particularly if,
uh, the new roading connections the East west
motorway is going through there, it requires
to go over the top of Westfield Junction.
If you're going to do that, then you can make sure
that you can do the rail, the rail at the same
time through there.
The other lar the other ones are the electrification from,
uh, uh, tower, uh, through Targa.
That's still very much in the interim phase.
Again, it's a long burning exercise, get the planning,
get established and take it through back in mid 2030s
and in, in Wellington, the metros North, south Junction, uh,
which is brilliant c**k reiki
and, uh, Karu Bay, obviously trying
to shorten them out of single track
through there over a period of time.
And in willing, if it's changing
of the signaling system from
what we have at the present moment to an ETCS system,
which removes the risk of driver error.
Similarly, that's the big guys. Um,
So just on the, the designation, so that will be,
be addressed if the designation will simply
extend it, that will protect you.
Yes. But if the designation were not extend it
and you weren't able to actually do something in that period
of time, what, what actually happens?
Because you still, you said you own the land.
We own the land, but if the designation lapses,
it is a very much harder thing to restart, as opposed to
It's a planning, it's a planning thing rather than land.
It's, it's a, it's a planning thing.
And I, and it goes, I think I've spoken to this committee
before about the ability to sustain
long-term designations in the corridor and for corridors,
and it progressively accumulate land as opposed to
what the issue is at the moment.
With most designations, you have
to have the designation in place and then you go out
and buy, which means you're basically got one up your
back in terms of that.
But Will the, sorry, sorry. Hang on.
I, I had, I had a number of subs there, so Simon,
you cut, you cut there.
So a cut loss. Yep.
Yes. Um, as you are aware, I'm a big fan of that, uh,
Evan Delvin Southway corridor,
and I have a meeting with you guys a few times as well.
And the project actually included the government fast track
approval in 2024 as well.
Do you mind, give me a little bit update
what's going on now?
Okay, well we have, we are three quarters of the way
through preparing the documentation
that we believe will be necessary
to sustain the designation.
Uh, that goes to the normal assessment of alternatives.
We're also looking at development opportunities
around that corridor.
I think the key issue with South Dan Avondale,
it's been viewed then through the lens
of being a freight freight bypass.
The reality is it's not, as you've seen cars on the to,
it's not a freight bypass at all.
The opportunity there is
to create another loop through Auckland.
We own chunks, good chunks of land, the ability
to get an uplift of our land,
and more, particularly a lot of the Crown land owned
by Mhar and others.
Mm-hmm. That is the key opportunity.
So are you saying
that there will be a business case gonna peace heading soon,
or what's the next
Steps? The next stage
is just to ensure we have it protected.
We will be producing something akin
to an information memorandum
to say we think this is the opportunity
for value uplift associated with that,
and that that'll go to ministers.
So what is the time? Are you gonna, you know, repeating
In terms of are your constituents going to see lots
of earth move in the 2020s?
The answer is no. It is basically mid 2030s when you
see physical work going.
However, we may look to develop some of the sites early
and that will give effect to some of the works as well.
Thank You, Julian.
Um, my question was whether the replacement
to the RMA was going to make changes for you in terms
of redesignating or extending designations?
If you're aware,
You probably need to look across, You
probably won't be able to Yeah.
Answer that.
We have submitted several weeks.
Have you submitted, We have submitted and appeared it
before the select select committee.
Yeah. Yes. We, we are a listed project in, in, in,
in, in Fast track.
And yes, we obviously anything in the infrastructure
business that makes it possible to plan long term
and develop long term is going to have our vote.
Absolutely. Um,
I had another question about the overall issue.
Totally different issue.
Uh, it's sort of related.
It was like a stuff on your 'cause
because I was just wondering whether, um,
you've done any work on a new line to the North Shore, um,
that could be included in the sec additional white
to Maha Harbor
Crossing? No, we haven't
and have not been asked to. Okay.
Um, can I just ask one other thing just
to be clear about the, um, the,
what sounded like transport transit oriented development
potential alongside the Avondale southbound line is
what you were kind of alluding to?
Yep. Yes. Seeing that, yes.
Um, the ability for somebody, kiwi rail, um, the crown,
whoever it is, uh, to be able to access the upper benefits
of that before they get effectively privatized when,
you know, we socialize the cost and privatize the benefits.
Any advice around that?
Uh, that's certainly part of the business case
that we are putting forward.
We, sorry, we will be putting forward,
because clearly if you can intensify and mm-hmm.
Say if you can high rise
or at least multi-unit development over a station,
it's very hard to build those tanks of things over
and active railway line.
Right. It's a lot easier to build it before the light,
before the line is there, provided the developer has
confidence having made provision for a station, a station,
then there follows. This
Is one of the situations where you actually own more land
than you actually need for the railway line.
Therefore there's some land,
which could be some other things can be developed
and some of that value can be captured. Yeah,
Exactly. I
Think as well as any other way,
The other opportunity though is if you look at the amount
of crown land that's held in the Rosco mm-hmm.
Lower Mount Albert area, it's enormous.
There's huge crown land holding through there.
It's significant, gives real opportunity
for intensification of development.
Right. Okay.
Worth, worth knowing. Right. Okay.
I think I had tangi you had a, um, primary
Thank you.
Um, this might be a question for Duncan.
It's about the maintenance costs
of the existing furry fleet.
Mm-hmm. Uh, what they, what they look like currently?
That's the question.
So the maintenance costs, uh, as part
of low cost operational excellence, we're looking to, uh,
with centralized purchasing
and the way we implement those, we're looking
to bring those down as we go forward.
Uh, two years ago, as we briefed last year, inter Islander
and qra completely, uh, refocused on
how it conducted long-term maintenance, how it looked
after its assets and with a restructure and,
and a new way of bringing in some technical advice
and some overseas expertise about how we, how we went about
that, that continues to mature.
And, uh, the asset management
and the maintenance that we do on the current
fleet has leveled off.
And as we're going through a number of initiatives
through continuous improvement, we're looking to reduce it.
Do you have a, a figure in, in terms of what
that maintenance cost looks like?
Well, we normally keep that figure as commercial
and confidence as it was last year
because we use the same contractors as their competition
and, uh, we hold that close.
Okay. In terms of, um, mitigating any potential,
obviously we're heading into summer, uh, there were lots
of families traveling over the summer months.
Um, are you confident that the sort of mitigation
measures put in place to
alleviate any concerns around disruption?
So we've, um, from a maintenance perspective,
we have run the last financial year at 98%, which is our KPI
for the five months of this financial year,
we've been sailing at a hundred percent reliability to sale.
We're very focused on continuing that.
Uh, we do the majority of our maintenance.
Uh, we do all of our large maintenance
and the majority of the maintenance, uh,
in the off peak season to be ready for peak.
And we are focused on providing a safe, reliable service
with great customer experience to the New Zealanders
that want to travel over, over the peak soon,
The government have made some announcements
around the ocean response capability
and that ending in terms
of the current contract in February of next year.
What implications might that have for the operations of in,
So that decision was an external decision outside of QL,
our focus is totally on the preemptive high level
of maintenance that we do on our shifts to maintain
that a hundred percent reliability to sale that we have
for the last five months.
Uh, are there any implications in terms of, uh,
insurance costs that, uh, keeping rail may,
may pay as a result of not having that capability?
Resilience on standby, Jason?
No, No, no. Okay.
So that's fully something that the business is able
to, to do themselves.
Okay. Thank you.
Can I, uh, Fury?
Uh, yeah, it was about the ferry maintenance. Go for it.
Go for it. And sorry if this has already been addressed
or if you can't answer,
but I was just wondering if, um,
the Crown had been approached for, um, help with paying
increase any increased maintenance costs,
given the government decisions that led to needing
to extend the ferries for several years?
Or is it something that Q Rails just had
to absorb within the business
As it's, look, I mean, as an SOE,
obviously the commercial viability's critical.
So we have not gone to a shareholder
and asked for additional money.
Uh, it's about what Duncan said we're doing in terms
of driving efficiency,
but also driving a a, a stepped up asset management plan.
Uh, that's on us. And we've been delivering that within the,
within the, um, um, current, um, uh,
work plan and, uh, budget we have for internal.
I think the other, that also comes with a broader piece
around prioritizing expenditure,
looking at necessary expenditure and value for money.
But I guess like there'd be an opportunity cost.
Like there's, you're not able, if you have
to spend more money on maintenance mm-hmm.
Because of a government decision, then
that's less money you can spend elsewhere on tracks
or on what, you know,
It's, it's less money.
We maybe even spend we on some other things,
not necessarily tracks,
but we've gotta prioritize, um, as any business,
any business, should we actually spend our money.
Presumably even new ferries will
require some maintenance as well.
I will. Mr. Chairman, um, Just on ferries,
I've got one, one question, then I'll come back to you.
Um, URI um, who's, which I understand has been sold,
is still sitting, waiting for,
and I understand there's some clearances.
Can you just tell us what's going on with that?
'cause it does seem somewhat odd.
So, uh, the ary has been sold. Mm-hmm.
And that owner is working with the EPA to, uh,
gain an export license so that artery can then travel
to its next destination that that owner wants, wants to send
It. So why does
a ship,
because I know the Navy apparently suffers from the same
thing when you decommission ship,
why does a ship need an export clearance from a New Zealand?
There are a New Zealand environmental regulator
when it's actually leaving New Zealand.
So it's this, when it's sold are going concerned.
It does not when it's sold for recycling. It does.
There are a number of international
conventions that have to be met.
Um, and those are detailed questions for the EPA.
So this is driven
by international convention rather than Correct.
It's not, it's not something we've made up as New Zealand.
This is consistent through the
Countries. Yeah,
Correct.
Recycle. So it was being sold
to somebody they decide to recycle.
It's fine. Okay.
Fascinating. Thanks
Mr. Chair. Can I just check
the,
the question about the maintenance costs have, has Kiwi Rail
previously disclosed annual
maintenance costs for the ferries?
Uh, we haven't published No ferries
O Over the last three or four years.
There's been no figures around annual maintenance
Disclosed Total maintenance cost
for the entire business. Yeah,
But Not,
Okay.
Okay. I'm looking to see if there are
any other questions. No, there
Are not.
I'm saying that No, there are not. No, you don't have any.
That's fine. I didn't think that we any anymore,
and that's why I asked.
So I think we are done.
We really appreciate, um, fulsome answers
to all the questions and, uh, thank you very much
and you are very welcome to stay in this very holding.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Need to, anyway.
Peter and I will be staying. Thank you.
Okay, thank you very much. Thank you very much.
It's still, still live, Jonathan? Yeah, yeah,
Absolutely.
So do a hour of hearing
Depending on, not a target.
Not a target. Depends how long you go
For. Yeah, but lot
longer than one
Hour. No, no, no,
no, no, no, no.
We we're half an hour earlier,
which means we finish at least half an hour.
We in that. So be
Someone Got trace cash.
Okay. Right. Look, welcome back.
Can you do second time fraction over 24 hours?
Yep. So, um, usual protocol.
If there's anything you wanted to, to talk to, um, we'll do
that and then we'll go, we'll go to questions.
I know there'll be the odd view,
particularly on my, on my left.
Um, so we'll look forward to what you've gotta say.
Yeah. Well, unlike our colleagues, um, we've got a fairly,
fairly short, um, sort of story to tell.
We were established effectively by cabinet in March
and came into being on the 1st of April.
Um, our mandate was two ships,
restructuring, rebuild, whatever you wanna call it,
of two ports and working with Kiu Rail
as the presumed operator going forward.
We were to provide a resilient, um,
and reliable and safe theory between Wellington and Pickton.
We are working with RA Center Port or Marlborough, um,
and also on the external peace, NZTA,
ministry of Transport and Treasury.
Uh, we have a new board, uh, we have a new CEO
who came in in September,
and we've got three other people here, two who were part
of the 1st of April, uh,
and they third who's come in working on
infrastructure as we speak.
We have, um, set up a CEO's group, uh,
and that CEO's group, uh, is important for ensuring
that we've got the commitment as well as the
timelines and so forth.
Uh, we started off in many respects, this project
is a bit backwards in that we came in when a number
of decisions had already been made.
And so, uh, we were straight into it rather than being able
to develop a program, which then, uh, we would go ahead
and deliver.
It is a program which has
in some respects three components to it.
One which is the ferries and the other two are the ports,
and then Kira as, as the operator.
And so we're working with those projects, which is part
of the overall program, uh, at this point in time.
Uh, I would have to say as a board, we are, um,
very impressed and proud of
what the organization has produced up to this point.
Uh, I came back from China on the weekend.
We have signed for two rail ferries, uh,
200 meters by 28 by 6.5,
1500 plus passengers, uh,
and 20 knots, which includes 20 knots through the sounds so
that, um, the new form of the HU
enables it to go through there.
And the wave energy is such that, um,
it's not going be restricted in the way that the,
the current ferries, uh, are propeller driven with a rudder.
Um, and as the minister, when he made the announcement, uh,
said, these new ferries will have ASI pods, uh,
which makes 'em more maneuverable, um,
both in the harbor and at sea.
Uh, they are diesel electric hybrids, uh,
and they have batteries on them,
which gives them a safe return to port.
So they are, um, very much advanced on
where the existing ferries are.
Interesting. Uh, so I think, uh, that's,
um, probably enough at the moment.
Uh, I'll let, um, Sandra as the CEO speak, uh,
but I will just finalize by saying we are very appreciative
of the cooperation that we've had with our three partners,
which is the two ports in Kira.
Uh, it is difficult, uh, dealing with some
because they have, if you like, got fur
because the, there were some, uh, fury changes that were
identified pre ix then they've been through IX
and now they're going through this program.
The advantage that we have
as Ferry Holdings is that we're independent.
We're not interested in the ships,
we don't have any role in the ports, and so
therefore we have been seen by the parties as independent.
So hand over now to send it.
Yeah. Hi. Um, as,
as the ships now are locked in, in contract,
that provides us a dart point for which the rest
of the design can unfold.
We're focused on, uh,
making sure we name nail the entire design.
'cause once we've got control over the design,
we can get a program up and running
and we understand to meet our funding commitments
that we have to perform from program on day one.
To do that, we need, um, commitment from the port companies
and kiwi rail, and we've got that.
So the mission for the team now is to hit our design
and hit our program from day one.
I wanted to start with that.
Okay. Right. I
Think Tanya, you had the first question.
Yes, please. Simon. Thank you.
Can you explain for me why you think it's in the interest
of New Zealanders to effectively have a, uh, an order
for $596 million as opposed to two ships
that were superior
and at a fixed price of $551 million?
Um, the answer to that is we are not ix
and so we, we aren't answering for ire.
We've designed two ships based on what the projections are
between now and 20 and 30 years time.
Because remember, we're talking about two 30 year cycles.
So ships designed for 30 years.
The projections on the nu the amount of freight
and the passenger numbers.
And remember, these two vessels have got over 1500
passengers each, which is greater than the capacity
of the three ferries that were operated by inter Islander.
Um, they have the capacity now greater than the four vessels
that are transiting the straight, they have freight
capacity both in truck lane meters and in rail.
They've been been designed for 40 rail wagons, um,
and personal cars.
They have a design which includes a, a deck which comes down
during peak periods to allow extra vehicles on it.
So the ships are designed and it, and it's been independent.
We, we didn't pick up ix.
They've been independently designed on the basis
of known projections and the current market as well.
The other issue that we've got is they are basically
ax vessels with 10 pieces of steel running through the deck,
but they can be operated as ax as well as rail
enabled ferries.
So they are versatile.
Um, and so that's, that's the reason
that we've got the two vessels that, that we've ordered
Yesterday. Uh,
you may have heard me ask the minister a question about,
uh, the public availability of the terms of the contract.
Mm-hmm. That, that was signed, um, for a moment.
The, I thought he was going to release it,
but no, that was just an offer for his trip photo book.
Um, so what can the public expect?
What he said he, what, what can the public expect in terms
of, uh, an awareness
and understanding as to what the specific terms
of the contract that was signed last week or contain?
Uh, the contract signed last week was for
GSI in China to build two vessels.
The vessels are being built to the specifications as set
by furry holdings limited.
The vessels will have a mixture of buyers as well
as a seller's list.
And so, um, what that means is that we will be able
to specify quite a large amount of what's in there.
For example, New Zealand content, carpet seats, whatever.
Uh, we will identify communication equipment that
is our purchase.
And there are other things that are on the maker's list
which, um, will be supplied as part of the ship.
The quality of the interior of the ship is, uh,
superior to what is in existence at the moment.
And, and another advantage
of the way the ships have been designed is that
it's only eight or 10 weeks of the year
where the ships are at maximum capacity.
And so it actually has the ability for areas of the vessel
to be shut off during those non peak times, which,
which saves on brewing and,
and other, um, costs in maintaining the vessel.
So, um, yeah, they'll get a superior product, um,
more details of the contract that will be up to, uh,
ministers to aside when that that goes forward. Okay.
Is there a cancellation clause
that contains a figure in the contract?
Um, yeah, I think Steven can you,
you probably are.
No, it's simple answer. Okay.
And then, and I, I guess I add to that, that that's normal
and should go contract.
There are no termination clause given the every reliance
of the shipyard on extensive supply chain
Yes. And reliance
of things get done. Very good.
Um, and, and just finally,
what is the delivery date for the ships?
The delivery dates are early 2029, so it's, it's
potentially in the first quarter.
Uh, and the second one is pre-Christmas 2029.
The reason for the split,
or part of the reason for the split is
that we want the first one in service ironed out any
of the issues that may come out from the first one so
that any improvements that need to be made are made
before the second one is here.
Now, most of those checks are actually done
during sea trials in China, so
that we may identify issues during that period that,
that we would like, um, fixed
before they arrive in New Zealand.
Part of the reason that the timing is such is
because that's what, at the moment,
based on the engineering issues that we have in both ports,
particularly Pickton, uh,
we can't potentially take them prior to that.
And so the delivery date fits
with the infrastructure construction of the two. Okay.
Got other questions, but I'll let others
Yeah, I'll look, I'll just suck
off that one then I gotta sign.
So, 'cause one of my questions was the, the critical path,
um, which does relate to the critical path
for the infrastructure, which the problem, one
of the many problems, the previous proposition was
that the ferries were award at a timeframe,
which there was no chance
of ports being even close to ready.
Um, so what's the critical path there to make sure that the,
um, the ports are done dusted, waiting
for ferries when they arrive?
Alright, I'll answer quickly
and then then, um, Richard May be able
to answer in more detail.
The board I'll Ferry Holdings was until
about a week before the decision was made by Cabinet,
actually hesitant to recommend
that a ship's contract be signed.
The reason for that was
because we did not want
to have vessels arriving here without the
infrastructure in place.
What we did was we had a number of discussions
with the two ports and the Kira,
because Kira was a critical part of that.
The board was convinced at the meeting
before the paper went to the ministers
that in fact we had sufficient certainty
that the infrastructure would be in place.
Um, and I think if Richard Heckman, who
is sitting there can explain the agreements we've got now
for Early Works agreements
and other contracts with the ports,
Um, good afternoon.
Um, the, I think it's, it, it's fair to say
that the program that we have, um, developed
with our three partners is not what you would call a a,
a nice easy waterfall design,
consent procure construct.
Uh, we don't have time, uh, we don't have the time available
to, to run that.
We need to, um, get the, the vessels here
and operating, um, within the, the, the, the life
that's been identified for the existing fleet.
Um, so we have been working with our partners to
find ways to, um, uh, bring forward, um, construction,
um, through early design packages, through
enabling works activities.
And both ports have enabling works underway at the moment in
terms of, actually that's not, that's not true.
I'll strike that. We have one,
we have enabling works underway and Centerport,
and in, in about a week, we will have, um, enabling works
underway in terms of demolition and picton.
So plus a week early there.
Um, and similarly, we were, we are out to market already
for, uh, a MainWorks contractor, uh, in Pickton
where the quantity of work, um, is greater,
uh, than in Wellington.
And we're also out to market for a link links span supply.
Uh, we want to get these partners on board early
because links span, uh, design information is needed
by the ports for their, for their structural design.
Um, and similarly, we, we want a, a MainWorks contract,
a partner available and onboard
to inform the developing design in Port Malborough.
Um, and I can, I can,
I don't wanna ramble, I can wrap this up.
Um, but suffice to say, we, we are bringing, we, you know,
as design is available, uh, we are looking to package
that up, get that priced, and get that work underway.
And that is the way that we will be able
to deliver this project on time.
I guess the most important thing to say, just to, just
to echo your comments, um, both Port Marlborough
and Center Port, uh, are on board
and agree that we have the time of a, um, we,
we can deliver these port, um, upgrades
and time for the vessels.
Um, we just need to, um, collaborate
and get behind the program and,
and work together to get it done.
So the time, the timeframe for deliver the, of the,
the infrastructure on port, both of them.
So that will be carefully monitored
and reported on a regular basis
as we go through that project.
So we, we know that we are, yeah, we're looking Okay.
Or Yeah. Any challenges which are happening as we go through
and the assets that will be, so the asked, so
what is built on both ports will be paid for by who
and owned by who, because there's
Obviously, I just answer they're on the ports
and, you know, you're either paying for them to access them
and use them or Yeah.
You know, or you own them. How, how's that work?
I'll answer the first point first,
and that is that the board has actually set some quite tough
deadlines for, um, ferry Holdings
to meet the board has been very determined that subject
to normal New Zealand infrastructure, um, issues,
we are going to come in on time and on
or below budget if we can.
So we're determined to do that.
On the second point, as the minister announced
in November, port Mul was putting 110 in,
so it's public amount, uh, publicly known
and willing Center port is putting in a mountain, which
is the final amount known,
Let's just say it's up to a hundred million.
Up to a hundred million. Yeah.
So, um, the ports are putting that contribution, uh,
and, um, and the rest is Crown.
Um, and it's mainly in Pickton, uh,
but the link spans, which are in both ports will be owned
by Ferry Holdings.
Um, and part of the reason for that, of course, is that
unlike the current operation of both Inter Island
and Blue Bridge, uh,
rail ferries have specific infrastructure and links spans.
So it's, it's a piece of infrastructure that's unique
to the ferries, and so that will remain in crown ownership.
Okay. So, so that didn't quite finish off the answer to
that question, then I'll go to Julianne.
So the ownership of the infrastructure lever side, the,
the links span, that's clear.
The ownership of the infrastructure,
which has been partially funded by the Crown
and trust funded by the ports,
That is part of Ongoing negotiations process,
That's part of ongoing negotiations, negotiations,
Negotiation. Okay.
So there's commercial arrangements,
obviously. Yeah. Juliet,
I guess based on what you're saying,
we don't really know the full cost yet
because it hasn't been designed and priced.
Can I answer that? You,
you don't know the full cost of a,
Of a project like this until the, the date
that the last bill comes in.
Okay. And so we are progressively,
and I don't wanna be sound facetious by saying that,
you know, we are progressively, um, uh,
maintaining a view on cost.
Uh, we've undertaken robust QRA process that
that reflects the fact that at the moment our design is,
is at a relatively early stage in development.
Um, and, and we are comfortable that we have, um,
in both cost and time, um, sufficient contingency, uh,
within our, within the envelope within which we've been
provided to deliver the program.
Hmm. But we can't really say what the full cost is
relative to IX yet.
No, no,
That's a, that is a fair comment.
Okay.
Please, can I, can I also ask, um, just you mentioned,
um, hybrid electric diesel ships, um,
like was the ongoing operating costs included
in any sort of comparison
or we just looking at the purchase price?
We haven't looked at the No, the operating cost in terms
of fuel or anything else because, and
Looking at purchasing the vessels.
Yeah. Um, cost wasn't the primary driver. Okay.
Cost was important, but it was the ability of a shipyard
and, and as publicly known,
there was six shipyards towards the end.
It was the ability to build two vessels of the design
that were required.
And Cook Strait does have some unique characteristics.
Um, it was also the ability
to deliver two ships in 2029 to fit with the retirement.
Um, of the K boats that were there, there was cost,
there was operating costs.
So when we looked at, uh, the propulsion systems,
uh, one of the reasons for a pods was
that they are far more efficient in restricted waters
compared to the current propeller.
Um, and also
critically they're important in Wellington when they're
birthing in the Wellington port
because you have vessels on a T key at the same time.
So they are more maneuverable.
Uh, we ran quite a series of, um, tests
through a, um, a laboratory in Brisbane,
which showed us the results
of the different propulsion systems that we had.
The vessels are also designed that the engines
that are going into them potentially can use
alternative fuels.
So, and there is provision being made within the hu
for those provision, for those alternative fuels.
Fuels. They have the batteries which enable them subject
to the source of power
that we are still working on for Wellington.
Uh, they can actually birth in Wellington
and Pickton on battery,
and when they're in the port, they don't need
to have the diesel engines going.
So there are operational, um, savings to be made
through the design that we've actually put together.
Um, the alternative fuels seems pretty important if these
are 30 year, we're expecting a 30 years of use of them.
They're not coming into service until 2029,
and we need to drastically reduce carbon emissions
and be net zero by 2050.
Um, so yeah, I guess that's,
that's the plan then is alternative fuels Yes.
Some alternative to diesel
At the moment.
They will arrive here potentially with diesel Yeah.
Engines, but if someone magically finds an alternative fuel
between now and 2029, then it could come out
using alternative fuels.
But there's no indication yet that
anyone is producing it in sufficient quantity for
a vessel like, um, the ferries to actually use.
But the potential is there, the engines are being designed
to be able to, um, use that alternative. Can I go
Another list for a primary on another issue?
Another Primary, yeah.
What I'm gonna do is gonna get Simon,
because he hasn't had one yet, and then
I'm gonna t and then I come back to you.
Thank you very much. Uh, now just wanna acknowledge that,
uh, through Holdings is not responsible, uh,
for the IX project,
but I understand that a lot
of very valuable geotech information, uh,
and other contextual information was obtained, uh,
through the IX project.
So I'm interested as to how much of that information,
how much of that technical, uh, information has,
has been available, uh, to Ferry Holdings
and how much of that is useful?
Yeah. Can you go, Richard? Yep.
Yeah, so look, we've, um, obviously, um, had a a, a a,
an open, uh, relationship with Kiran on
where there is useful documentation.
Um, they, they've made that available for us,
and we, we thank them for that.
Um, the, the documentation was,
the existing geotechnical information was useful for some
of the very early thinking.
Um, but the reality is once you get even
into the early stages of, of,
or the late stage, the concept design, early stage
of prelim design, you want to have a borehole, right?
Where you're putting that, that that pile.
And so because, uh,
the wharf in Pickton is in a different location
than under ix, and we have exactly,
and the wharf extension in Wellington was not proposed.
Uh, we had new wharf in Wellington.
The reality is we've had
to do more geotechnical investigation
that's happened in both ports now.
Um, there will almost certainly be some more,
but, um, what we've got, uh, has been very useful.
Uh, if I was to summarize, um, Wellington,
it's been a good story and Pickton not such a good story.
We've got rock a little bit higher than we'd like,
but we're, we're dealing with that,
and that's being factored in to our risk thinking and,
and features within our QRA, um, analysis for, for,
you know, affordability, um,
overall affordability within the envelope.
Okay. Um, what about, uh, other technical reports
around environmental risks?
Uh, have you been able to use any of the information, say,
I don't know if there are penguins?
Yeah. Uh, lizards, uh, all these other things tend
to crop up on every major project that, um,
can often cause years of delays.
Yeah. Uh, how are you managing, uh, how have you been able
to take on any of the technical reports,
information from IX and
Yeah. So look, that's, that's
quite a broad question.
Um, but I'll try
and, um, give you a best broad, broad answer that I can.
Mm-hmm. Um, so if we look at the consenting, uh, pathway
that's proposed in Picton, the intention is to, um, make use
of the existing consent obtained under, under IR.
So that's fantastic. Um, there's a,
there's a principle there called in general accordance.
Um, we understand PM
and z our, our collaborate collaborators down there have
been talking with MDC
and, uh, the local territorial authority.
And they, uh, they, MDC is pretty comfortable that both the,
the new birth, the, the primary wharf that's being built,
but also the proposed transition infrastructure
that will allow us to, um, uh, relocate the K ships
and create some construction space for the new wharf.
Can that all that work can be done under existing consents.
That means we have all the management plans
that were established,
and if they weren't signed off,
were just about ready to be signed off.
Um, and a lot of the environmental assessments
as well undertaken in support of construction impacts, all
of that is being, being reused.
So in, in Pickton we've got great reuse.
Um, in Wellington it's a different story.
Um, the, or under ix, the,
the original wharf was being built very near stream,
and that had, um, you know, significant
cultural significance as well as environmental significance.
And that led to a number of, um, consent conditions
that were very specific for that location of wharf.
Um, Centerport has taken a look at what that would mean
for a, a relatively modest wharf extension, and then,
and then work that is, you know,
in the existing environments of the ferry operations.
And I, I think they have sensibly
said, actually, let's go a different route.
Let's go and get some, some new consents.
Uh, they fall, I believe, within the commercial port area,
um, entirely.
And so that helps them, um,
that helps in terms of the pathway.
There are existing permissions in, in place, um,
but there is a need to probably undertake
some new assessments.
Um, fortunately that can leverage off, I think other works
that have been happening in the harbor to some extent.
Mm-hmm. Um, including seaview, including ua, um,
and, and the new, um, sea Wall works and,
and cycleway works.
So all of this is adding to the local knowledge.
Um, but there will need to be some new assessments done.
Uh, there is a specific marine mammal protection
plan, uh, that we're hoping we can make use of.
It's currently in RA's name.
We have to work out whether we can transfer that
to center port's name.
That's a, that's an under, uh,
that's an ongoing question at this point.
So we are, I guess the point is
to the greatest extent we can, we wanna leverage off
what was developed under ix, not redo that.
You know, this is an MVP approach to infrastructure
development, and we're taking that right
through the delivery as much as we can. Oh,
That's excellent. That's really heartening
To hear. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, Tony,
Thank you. Can I just
check on a answer
that was given about center port's contribution of being up
to $1 million, a hundred million, sorry, $100 million that,
that's a financial contribution rather than including
what could be contribution in kind?
Um, sorry.
So, so the contribution is, is tied to the assets
that they would logically own at the board.
Um, and so the contribution is not
so much a, a, a fixed amount.
It is, um, associated
with the current infrastructure that is being extended
strengthened, enhanced for the 30 year life
of, of the new ships.
Okay. Um, so that'll be funding that they put in
to assets that they will own.
So there's a broad principle, um, in the project in terms
of funding and asset ownership is
that you own what you fund.
And so for Centerport, um,
their funding will be ultimately tied to the assets
that it will end up owning, which is, as I say, orientated
around the, the current wharf structures
and other marine, other related marine assets, um,
that they already own that are being strengthened,
enhanced life extended.
Thanks. Another primary, another primary. Uh, yeah.
Okay. Go. We're all, we're all on the same issues anyway.
Okay. Um, look, thank you for your answers
to the, uh, questionnaire.
Given that there's no annual report given your infancy in
the, uh, as, as an entity.
Um, there's a question there about NDAs for staff
and contractors, and you'd indicated
that there were NDAs in place for all,
uh, staff and contractors.
Can you just confirm the total number of staff, uh, and,
and, uh, contractors that you have.
This says two permanent, two fixed,
and nine contractors. Is that accurate?
That says the 30th of June,
Right? What would it be now?
24.
24. And what, what's the breakup there?
All staff, no
Contractors insurance. 24 staff
contractors would be
10, 10, 10 permanent employees on the payroll.
Uh, and the balance of contractors
At the moment. So
10 recruitment plans underway,
So 10 permanent staff and 14 contractors,
Something like that in our office.
Then there's consultants working as lawyers and engineers
and those sorts of things as well
On top of that figure.
And they've all signed up to the NDAs.
What is, I mean, the minister has been very critical
of the use of consultants previously
around the former, uh, project.
So why, why is there an increasing reliance on, uh, engaging
an increasing number of, of contractors?
So the port companies have, uh, mobilized their forces
to start the design work, to start the consenting
and planning for construction and the procurement work.
So those are the port companies that are working on those
and they fall under our NDAs.
Right. But, but set aside the NDAs Sure.
Because it was the only sort of information
that was made available in terms of your actual,
uh, personnel count.
Sure. So why,
why is there a reliance on an increasing number of
contractors and consultants when the minister has been
publicly quite critical of the involvement of contractors
and consultants in previous forms of infrastructure? Can
You answer that? Sure.
When we were set up, the minister,
the three shareholding ministers quite determined
that we would be a small type unit
and that there were a number of specialties that the crown,
the public service does not employ.
And so we've got contractors in here, for example, Richard,
who is specialist in some of that engineering work.
We don't employ those people in the public service.
And because this is a short term project,
uh, it is, it was felt better to get people in
with that specialty.
And they may vary, or some of them we've already had people
who have been in and have all been left
because their specific role had finished.
So the reason is we are only contracting for specialties
that we don't have in house.
So we've got accountants, we've got
legal firms and so forth who don't do the sort of work
that the public service lawyers do.
You know, we don't have in the public service marine lawyers
and, and so forth.
And it costs us too much
to actually bring them in house
and then later on. Makes perfect
Sense. I, I understand.
Yeah.
How many of the contractors
and consultants that you currently have engaged
were involved in the IRE project?
So we've got, uh, at time of the report, um, we've got
four employees, uh,
and since then we've recruited one, one more.
So out of the 10 current people on payroll, five
of them previously had some experience in
ix as the chair said.
It's a small market, uh,
and we recruit, uh, talent, uh, less so, um, you know,
the particular organizational backgrounds.
Sure. So of the 14 contractors
that you've just said you have on the books, how many
of those 14 contractors have been previously involved
with any aspects of the IRE project?
I don't have that specific
information to hand, but we could get it for you.
Okay, thank you. Thanks.
Um, I've got one other question, uh, which is just the,
uh, the visitor experience, the loading
and unloading experience would be fair to say that, um, the,
there's been a bit of a dog's breakfast both ends of the,
um, of the strait on both sides
of the strait for a very long time.
Quite, it's quite a confusing arrangement.
Different ships, it's different loading
and unloading, um, scenario.
And likewise, um, different ports,
it's a different loading unloading experience.
Um, you wouldn't, it marks outta 10
would be pretty low for that.
Um, what's the proposition gonna be for these two?
I know there's not gonna be a lot spent on it,
but will you at least have a uniform experience?
Uh, we'll certainly have uniform ships, which will start,
which will help, but uniform experience at both ends,
which will be sort of legible, sensible way of doing things,
which is reasonably good experience.
When the vessels arrive,
you'll notice improvements in the way in which
they're loaded, unloaded both in the vehicle, um, space
and also in the passenger space.
Um, our ships, uh,
project managers in China at the moment working
on those sorts of details.
But, um, there will be dual lane, um,
carriageways onto the ferry at Pickton.
There'll be Duke dual carriageway, um, in Wellington
for the first portion of it.
The rail deck itself will be improved over
what is in existence at the moment.
Uh, there are still detail designs to be done on,
on the rail deck, uh, alignment itself.
Um, and that will enhance the way that rail
wagons are loaded, unloaded,
but it also gives us an ability to, um, load trucks
and unload trucks for far more efficiently.
The other thing is that the passengers in the future won't
be climbing up, uh,
or take an escalator up to deck seven level.
Uh, they'll be coming in at the same level as the trucks
and trains, except they'll be coming onto deck four
instead of deck three.
And it will be an airline style, um, gangway, so that,
again, like the current ferries, it'll be all undercover.
They'll come outta the terminal building
into this airline style gangway straight onto a set
of escalators within the vessel,
which takes 'em up to deck seven. That
Sounds much Better. So,
and that's where some of the savings have been made.
You know, we've made the, as I said yesterday at the,
when the minister was here,
we've made savings in the way in which we're doing the link
spans and we're making savings in the way in which
passengers are loaded in the future.
Yeah. Because the elevated walkways
are actually quite expensive.
Cool. Cool. That's good. Good to know.
Okay, any other questions?
I had one, but now I can't
remember what it was. Sorry. You
Can't remember what it was. You can't remember
what, remember pretty quick? Yeah.
Oh, well, I, I mean, maybe you've already covered this.
I, I think what is the expected timeframe on design
and when could we expect the actual ship build to start?
Uh, the design is going on in detail. Yeah.
Now, how long is that gonna take? And
The first sets of plates will be put together
at this point in time.
January 27.
Oh, approximately a year from now.
We'll watch that critical path with interest by both end,
both by both ships and, and the fer.
I think we are done with questions.
Checking going once, going twice. I think we are done.
Thank you very much. Uh, really good to have you all here.
Um, and I appreciate all the, the answers to the questions
and, uh, we'll be watching the, the ongoing progress.
Keep keep up with good work. Thanks very much.